Alphabet Inc. (NASDAQ:GOOG) Q2 2018 Results Earnings Conference Call July 23, 2018  4:30 PM ET
Executives
Ellen West - Head, IR
Sundar Pichai - CEO
Ruth Porat - CFO
Analysts
Eric Sheridan - UBS
Heather Bellini - Goldman Sachs
Brian Nowak - Morgan Stanley
Doug Anmuth - JP Morgan
Anthony DiClemente - Evercore
Mark Mahaney - RBC Capital Markets
Dan Salmon - BMO Capital Markets
Brent Thill - Jefferies
Colin Sebastian - Robert W. Baird
Michael Nathanson - MoffettNathanson
Operator
Good day, ladies and gentlemen, and welcome to the Alphabet Second Quarter 2018 Earnings Call. At this time, all participants are in a listen-only mode. Later, we will conduct a question-and-answer session and instructions will be given at that time [Operator Instructions]
I’d now like to turn the conference call over to Ellen West, Head of Investor Relations. Please go ahead.
Ellen West
Thank you. Good afternoon, everyone, and welcome to Alphabet’s second quarter 2018 earnings conference call. With us today are Ruth Porat and Sundar Pichai. Now, I’ll quickly cover the safe harbor.
Some of the statements that we make today may be considered forward-looking, including statements regarding our future investments, our long-term growth and innovation, the expected performance of our businesses and our expected level of capital expenditures. These statements involve a number of risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially. For more information, please refer to the risk factors discussed in our Form 10-K for 2017 filed with the SEC. Undue reliance should not be placed on any forward-looking statements, and they are made based on assumptions as of today. We undertake no obligation to update them.
During this call, we will present both GAAP and non-GAAP financial measures. A reconciliation of GAAP to non-GAAP measures is included in today’s earnings press release. As you know, we distribute our earnings release through our Investor Relations website located at abc.xyz/investor. This call is also being webcast from our IR website, where a replay of the call will be available later today.
And now, I’ll turn the call over to Ruth.
Ruth Porat
Thank you, Ellen.
We delivered another quarter with strong operating performance, reflecting our focus on building great experiences for users, advertisers and enterprise customers around the world. In aggregate, we had substantial revenue growth, up 26% year-on-year and up 23% in constant currency. Sites revenues continued to exhibit strong year-on-year momentum, benefiting from innovation and secular growth with mobile search again leading the way.
Our network adverting business maintained a healthy growth, led by AdMob and programmatic advertising. The businesses comprising other revenues, namely Cloud, Play and Hardware again had substantial growth.
Our outline for today’s call is I’ll begin with results for the quarter on a consolidated basis for Alphabet, focusing on year-over-year changes. There are two items to note in our earnings press release. First, we provided a table to highlight the impact of the European Commission fines on operating income, net income and EPS results in the second quarters of 2018 and 2017. Second, as discussed last quarter, our results are affected by the new accounting standard that changes the way companies account for equity security investments. This new standard continues to result in greater volatility in OI&E. I’ll highlight the impact on particular line items, as I review the quarter. I will then review results for Google followed by Other Bets and will conclude with our outlook. Sundar will then discuss business and product highlights, after which we will take your questions.
Starting with the summary of Alphabet’s consolidated financial performance for the quarter. Our total revenues of $32.7 billion were up 26% year-over-year. We realized the positive currency impact on our revenues year-over-year of $768 million or $665 million after the impact of our hedging program.

Turning to Alphabet revenues by geography. You can see that our performance was strong again in all regions. U.S. revenues were $14.9 billion, up 21% year-over-year. EMEA revenues were $10.8 billion, up 26% year-over-year. In constant currency terms, EMEA grew 19%, reflecting strengthening of both the euro and for British pound. APAC revenues were $5.1 billion, up 36% versus last year and up 34% in constant currency, reflecting strengthening of the Japanese yen and Korean won. Other Americas revenues were $1.8 billion, up 31% year-over-year and up 34% in constant currency, reflecting strengthening of the dollar relative to the Brazilian real.
On a consolidated basis, total cost of revenues, including TAC, which I’ll discuss in the Google segment results, was $13.9 billion, up 34% year-on-year. Other cost of revenues on a consolidated basis was $7.5 billion, up 41% year-over-year, primarily driven by Google-related expenses. The key drivers were costs associated with our data centers and other operations, including depreciation, which continued to be affected by a reallocation of certain operating expenses and content acquisition costs, primarily for YouTube, followed by hardware-related costs.
Operating expenses, including the impact of the EC fine, were $16 billion. Excluding the impact of the EC fines, operating expenses were $10.9 billion in the quarter, up 24% year-over-year. Once again, the biggest increase was in R&D expenses, reflecting our continued investment in technical talent. The growth in sales and marketing expenses reflects increases in sales and marketing headcount, primarily for Cloud, followed by advertising investments in Cloud and the Assistant.
G&A expense trends in the second quarter were affected by a number of factors, in particular, performance fees accrued in connection with the recognition of equity security gains, which were again partially offset by the reallocation of certain expenses from G&A, primarily the other cost of revenues.
Stock-based compensation totaled $2.4 billion. Headcount at the end of the quarter was 89,058, up 4,008 from last quarter. As in prior quarters, the majority of new hires were engineers and product managers. In terms of product areas, the most sizable headcount increases were in Cloud for both technical and sales roles.
Operating income was $2.8 billion. Excluding the impact of the EC fines, operating income was $7.9 billion, up 15% versus last year, for an operating margin of 24%. Other income and expense was $1.4 billion, which includes $1.1 billion of gains in equity security investments. We provide more detail on the line items within OI&E in our earnings press release.
Our effective tax rate was 24.2% for the second quarter, reflecting a sizable impact from the non-deductibility of the EC fine. Net income was $3.2 billion and earnings per diluted share were $4.54. Excluding the impact of the EC fine, net income was $8.3 billion and earnings per diluted share were $11.75.
Turning now to CapEx and operating cash flow. Cash CapEx for the quarter was $5.5 billion, which I’ll discuss in the Google segment results. Operating cash flow was $10.1 billion with free cash flow of $4.7 billion. We ended the quarter with cash and marketable securities of approximately $102 billion.
Let me now turn to our segment financial results, starting with the Google segment. Revenues were $32.5 billion, up 25% year-over-year. In terms of the revenue detail. Google Sites revenues were $23.3 billion in the quarter, up 26% year-over-year. In terms of dollar growth, results were led again by mobile search with strong contributions from both YouTube and desktop search.
Network revenues were $4.8 billion, up 14% year-on-year, reflecting the ongoing momentum of AdMob and programmatic. Other revenues for Google were $4.4 billion, up 37% year-over-year, fueled by Cloud, Play and Hardware.

We continue to provide monetization metrics in our earnings press release to give you a sense of the price and volume dynamics of our advertising businesses.
Total traffic acquisition costs were $6.4 billion or 23% of total advertising revenues and up 26% year-over-year. Total TAC as a percentage of total advertising revenues was up year-over-year, primarily reflecting an increase in the sites TAC rate, which was offset by a favorable revenue mix shift from network to sites. The increase in the sites TAC rate year-over-year was driven by changes in partner agreements and the ongoing shift to mobile, which carries higher TAC. This quarter, we experienced year-on-year decline in the network TAC rate as a result of the favorable mix shift within our problematic business.
Google stock-based compensation totaled $2.3 billion for the quarter, up 21% year-over-year. Operating income was $9 billion, up 17% versus last year and the operating margins was 27.6%. Accrued CapEx for the quarter was $5.3 billion, reflecting investments in production equipment, data center construction, and facilities.
Let me now turn and talk about Other Bets. Other Bets revenues were $145 million, primarily generated by Fiber and Verily. Operating loss was $732 million for the second quarter. Other Bets accrued CapEx was $10 million.
We’re pleased with our progress across Other Bets. A couple of updates. Waymo expanded its partnership with Fiat Chrysler with the option to add up to 62,000 Chrysler Pacifica minivans to its self-driving fleet. And lastly Waymo announced that it has driven more than 8 million fully autonomous miles with most of those on city streets.
A couple of weeks ago, X announced that Loon and Wing have graduated to become independent companies under Alphabet. Graduation from X signals that these companies have reached certain technical and business milestones and that their focus is shifting toward commercialization. And just last week, Loon indicated that it is partnering with Telkom Kenya to launch commercial service in regions of Kenya by early 2019.
Let me close with some observations on the quarter and our longer term outlook. First, with respect to revenues. We’re pleased with the ongoing momentum in our advertising businesses. As discussed previously, we continue to identify new opportunities through innovation, including the benefits of applying machine learning to create more useful experiences for users and advertisers.
Looking ahead, our hardware business is seasonal, typically experiencing lower growth in the third quarter in anticipation of the launch of new products for the holiday season. Second, with respect to profitability. Within cost of revenues, the biggest component is TAC. As we’ve discussed for the past couple of quarters, we expected the pace of year-on-year growth in sites TAC as a percentage of sites revenue would slow after the first quarter of 2018, and you can see that clearly in our results of this quarter.
As frequently discussed, we do expect the sites TAC rate to continue to increase year-on-year, reflecting ongoing strength in mobile search, albeit at a more moderate pace relative to the year-on-year increases experienced over the past several quarters.
Within OpEx, we continue to take a disciplined approach to setting priorities as we invest for the long-term growth. The majority of our headcount growth continues to be in technical roles and engineering and product management. In terms of business areas, the largest number of headcount additions were in our cloud business with hires for engineering, sales and marketing.
As a reminder, headcount additions tend to be seasonally higher in Q3 because that is when we bring our new graduates. As I mentioned last quarter, regarding sales and marketing, we continue to expect expenses to be more heavily weighted toward the back half of the year to support the holiday season.

Another factor to consider in year-on-year comparisons next quarter is the timing of two expense items in Q3 last year. As we called out last year, there was a meaningful benefit in the third quarter of 2017 from the shift in timing of our annual equity refresh and also from the timing of sales and marketing spend which was more heavily weighted to the fourth quarter.
For our Other Bets, we remain focused on making progress on a number of commercial opportunities across the business, while continuing to manage investment against achievement of key milestones.
Third, with respect to CapEx. As I discussed with you last quarter, our commitment to growth is evident in the ongoing trend in CapEx investment. We’ve been investing meaningfully in search and ads consistent with the opportunities we see to benefit the user and advertiser experience. And we are investing in the additional compute power required to support growth in the number of YouTube users globally. We’re also investing in new businesses that are growing at a rapid pace and have sizable compute needs, most notably Cloud. The investment pace also reflects the importance of machine learning across all of our products including search and ads. Although machine learning is more compute-intensive, it is increasingly core to businesses across Alphabet, and opens up the possibility of accelerated innovation in products and services. And keeping with our approach across Alphabet to invest thoughtfully for long-term value creation, we remain focused on both performance and cost effectiveness.
I will now turn the call over to Sundar.
Sundar Pichai
Thanks Ruth. It’s been a busy few months at Google, and we showed a lot of what we are working on at events like Google Marketing Live, Brandcast, and of course our annual developer conference, Google I/O. It was exciting to have millions of people join us in person and via live stream.
Tomorrow, I hope you’ll tune in to Google Cloud Next where the great momentum and innovation in our cloud business will be fully on display. The common thread you’ll hear on today’s call is the benefit of machine learning and AI, and how it’s improving our products and generating great results for our users and partners.
I also hope that everyone enjoyed the World Cup as much as I did. I know our French Googlers were very excited. I loved the competition and was extremely proud to see positive feedback about how useful Google Translate was for people who traveled to Russia. The app translates about 143 billion words a day. And during the World Cup, we saw a huge bump in volume.
In the simple moments when you’re in an unfamiliar place or you don’t know the language, Google is there to help with the right information at the right time. This is what we aspire to best at, and it’s why billions of people continue to put their trust in our products.
Today, I’ll start with how AI is enabling us to advance the mission of making information accessible and useful to everyone in new ways. Then, I’ll share updates on our computing, video and advertising platforms which are helping our partners succeed and grow. And finally, I’ll talk about our growing cloud business.
Let’s begin with AI helping our mission. We revamped the Google News app in May to create reviews. It uses machine learning to highlight top stories organized for users, explore topics more deeply with articles from a range of clustered news sources. We believe in the need to deliver high-quality information and news to users, and to support the news industry as we do so.
The Google Assistant is another the great product based on machine learning. By the end of this year, it will be available in more than 30 languages and 80 countries. We have worked with partners to expand the number of smart devices that are now compatible with the Google Assistant like doorbells, dryers, refrigerators and more, and connect with more than 5,000 devices in the home.

At Google I/O, we also highlighted how AI is improving Google Maps, including enhancing the experience with Assistant and AR features. Through our improvements in machine learning, we have seen a 25x increase in our ability to build maps algorithmically, and we have added 110 million algorithmically drawn buildings to Maps, since the beginning of this year. And with over 1 billion users, we’re continuing to see tremendous growth in maps with especially strong growth in countries like Indonesia, India and Nigeria, each of which are growing over 50% year-on-year.
There are many more great AI powered features we rolled out this quarter including the new version of Gmail with Smart Compose, a new features that helps users craft emails faster. And Google Photos now suggests actions to help you brighten, share, rotate or archive a picture.
Next, our computing, video and advertising platforms. These platforms are providing real economic opportunities for developers, creators and publishers in every corner of the vault. Last year, I announced that in the three-year period from 2014 to 2016, we paid out over $15 billion in revenue to our creator, publisher and app developer partners in Europe, Middle East and Africa via AdSense, YouTube and Google Play. Our contribution is accelerating. In 2017 alone, we generated an additional $7 billion for these partners.
First, our computing platforms. 10 years ago, we launched the first Android phone with a simple idea to build a mobile platform that’s free and open to everyone. Today, there are more than 24,000 devices at every price point from more than 1,300 different brands. The Android ecosystem supports thousands of phone makers and mobile network operators who build and sell Android devices. Millions of app developers around the world who have built their businesses of Android and billions of consumers who can now afford and use cutting-edge Android smartphones. This is all supported by a business model that encourages and enables this open ecosystem to thrive.
Continuing this momentum, at I/O, we unveiled a plethora of new features throughout the Android platform, like battery saving features in Android P, new Google Assistant capabilities on Wear OS, the new Android model to help developers optimize for a variety of devices and form factors, as well as tools to help users understand and control how they are spending time on their device. Our investments in our computing platforms, as well as in AI and design are also helping us generate great momentum in our made by Google hardware business across Pixel, Home, Nest, Chromecast and more. We brought Google Home and Mini to Ireland, Australia, Spain and Mexico. Additionally, bringing the Nest and Google teams together is showing early results. The products can more seamlessly work together and our product development and go-to-market are benefiting from the new alignment. There is a lot more to come here in the next few months.
Second, our video platform, YouTube is growing tremendously. We launched our revamped YouTube Music service across 17 countries, and it’s receiving great feedback from users and artists a lot. This quarter, YouTube rebranded its subscription service, YouTube Premium, featuring originals like our hit series Cobra Kai, which got 41 million views to first episode alone. While advertising on YouTube is an incredibly strong and growing source of income for creators, we are also investing in new ways for creators to generate revenue on the platform, including paid channel memberships, merchandise shelves on YouTube channels, and endorsement opportunities, through a company we acquired in 2016, FameBit. In fact, half of the creators that used FameBit in the first three months of 2018, doubled their YouTube revenue. 

And third, our advertising platforms which are firing on all cylinders, as we put the power of machine learning into marketers’ hands.
At Google Marketing Live, we introduced our newly rebranded advertising products, our core product Google Ads, Google Marketing Platform which provides analytics and ad serving for large marketers and agencies, and Google Ad Manager, our monetization engine for publishers.
We also announced a new ad format powered by machine learning, called Responsive Search Ads. It automates the manual process of building text ads and optimizes them in real time to show the best performing ad for each search query. Advertisers also got a first look at local campaigns and smart campaigns. Local campaigns are designed exclusively to drive foot traffic to local businesses and smart campaigns are now the default for new SMB advertisers. Small business owners love the simplicity and the results.
This quarter, we announced shopping and commerce partnerships with leading global retailers like Carrefour, designed to give people the power to shop wherever and however they want. Carrefour is a great example of how we can partner deeply with companies, bringing our shopping and ads and cloud products together for them. They recently chose to migrate from Office to G Suite for their more than 160,000 employees and have selected us as their main cloud provider, based on our ability to support the Company’s digital transformation.
Speaking of our efforts to help businesses succeed in the cloud, our cloud business has great momentum. It’s a natural extension of our long time strength in computing, data centers and machine learning. We have developed these over many years and they power our own services in the cloud and are now helping others. This week’s Google Cloud Next event will have more than 20,000 SMBs, up from over 2,000 at our Cloud Conference in 2016 with over 250 customers speaking.
I won’t spoil any of the surprises, but I do want to call out Google Cloud’s momentum. Success of our vertical strategy and customer centric approach was illustrated by key wins including Domino’s Pizza, SoundCloud and PricewaterhouseCoopers. Target is migrating three areas of its business to Google Cloud platform. Financial institutions are increasingly turning to the cloud to modernize their systems, explore new business models and improve customer experiences.
New customers include Banco Itaú in Brazil. We also have our rapidly growing business for our specialized cloud AI services. AirAsia expanded its relationship with us to use machine learning and data analytics. We are seeing an acceleration in business adoption of Chromebooks, the most secure and cost efficient way for businesses to enable their employees to work in the cloud.
In Q2, unit sales of managed Chromebooks grew by more than 175% year-over-year. And we saw deployments at customers like Veolia. And to support our growing global customer base, we continue to invest in new cables, open new regions in Finland and Los Angeles, and announced the Zurich region. We now have 17 open regions with three more on the way.
Before I close, I want to give a quick shout out to the work that we are doing to build great specialized products for the next wave of people coming online for the first time in countries like India, Indonesia, Brazil and Nigeria, many of whom experience the web only through their mobile phone. This is a big area of focus for us. Through a great partnership with Indian Railways, and RailTel, we have hit our goal of enabling high-speed public Wi-Fi in 400 train stations across India. We’ve also rolled out this Google Station model in Indonesia and Mexico with more to come soon.
And to help spur AI innovation in Africa, we recently announced the new Google AI research center in Ghana with the goal of bringing together top machine learning researchers and engineers to explore AI research and applications in Africa and beyond.

Of course, our commitment to help communities and people benefit from the digital economy, expense beyond the products that they use. Last month, as part of our broader growth Google effort, we expanded the Google IT Support Professional Certificate program to more than 25 community colleges in the U.S. This will give students an opportunity to learn skills needed to jump start their carriers in IT support.
I want to thank Googlers for their hard work which helps us create products that billions of people love and use every day.
With that, I’ll hand it back over to Ruth.
Ruth Porat
Thank you, Sundar. And we will now take your questions.
Question-and-Answer Session
Operator
Thank you. [Operator Instructions] And our first question comes from Eric Sheridan of UBS. Your line is now open.
Eric Sheridan
Thank you very much. Two questions if I can. Sundar, for you, following upon your comments, we’ve seen all of these partnerships announced in the commerce space. I want to understand how those partnerships might evolve over the next couple of years? What Google brings on table for those partners, what it might do for the advertising services business as we thing long-term? And then, we’ve been getting a lot of questions on Waymo, in the quarter. Is there any you can give us of some of the key investment milestones or how we should be thinking about capital allocated to the Waymo business in the coming years? Thanks so much.
Sundar Pichai
Great. On the commerce front, obviously, it’s a natural sector I think for us to drive partnerships. We already have deep advertising relationships with many of these providers, increasingly. Shopping is an area where we are beginning to work together. And finally, I think cloud is another important way by which we can start working together. So, I do think we are seeing a lot of traction there. I gave the Carrefour example. We also announced strategic partnership and significant investment in JD.com, the second largest ecommerce company in China. Today, we are already, for example in Google Express we’re partnering with over 100 merchants including national retailers like Walmart, Costco, Target, Walgreens and PetSmart. So, there is a lot of traction. I think we are building upon these relationships, trying to have more holistic conversations across the breadth of our offerings, and I think I see all being very synergistic.
Ruth Porat
And then, in terms of Waymo. We remain very excited about the opportunity with Waymo. You’ve seen us talk about our progress on a number of fronts. I think the main point is, it is still very early. But, in terms of our progress. So, 2018, the focus has been to launch the commercial rider program in Phoenix that we’ve talked about, looking to do that by year-end. We do view that as a first step in building a more fully rolled out rider program in the future. And as we’ve discussed on prior calls, we continue to trial the program in Phoenix with an emphasis on delivering a safe experience that delights users.
We’ve also continued to build out our vehicle relationships. You saw announcements regarding FCA and Jaguar. We’re expanding our testing to more states. We’re also working on additional areas such as logistics and deliveries. We talked this past quarter about licensing the technology for personal use vehicles, and we’re also focused on working with cities to help strengthen public transportation. More specifically, you’re focused on CapEx. As I said, we’re excited about the long-term opportunity but creation of a new market does take time. and then on the CapEx versus OpEx, the way it works is once the commercial program is up and running beyond what’s viewed as more of a development or R&D phase than much of the investments or CapEx versus OpEx. And that’s for car sensors and any other spend.

So, yes, we’re excited. We do think it’s really an important market, but it is still very early.
Operator
Thank you. And our next question comes from Heather Bellini of Goldman Sachs. Your line is open.
Heather Bellini
Great. I just had two questions. One, I was wondering if you could talk about what you’ve seen thus far with the rollout of GDPR? Anything you could share with us, and just how that’s played out versus your expectations at this point? And then, Sundar, as you mentioned, with Google Next upon us, and you’re obviously -- you guys are talking very positively about the business. But, are there anymore stats you can share with us, even about the growth rates in G Suite or GCP or combined? And then, when we think about this business scaling over time, is there any reason to think that the pace of gross margin progression would be materially different than say Azure, AWS at similar revenue levels? Thank you.
Sundar Pichai
Thanks, Heather. On GDPR, obviously something we’ve been working on for a long time well over 18 months, but the rollout just happened towards the end of second quarter. So, it’s a bit early to us to say anything. But for us, it’s been super important to get it right, and we’ve always been focused on user privacy. But, it’s been a big change for a lot of our partners as well. And so, we are working closely with our partners and regulators and committed to doing it right, but it’s too early to tell.
And on Google Next and Cloud, obviously the conference is tomorrow. So, I will hold for the announcements there. Couple of things, G Suite has definitely I think seen a lot of momentum, definitely have noticed in the -- now I think it can definitely serve the needs of a large enterprise, it’s clear I gave the Carrefour for example. But increasingly, we are seeing big companies take on the migration. So, that’s been four sure a positive development.
And on Cloud, I think we are investing for the long run. We are definitely seeing traction. A lot of our effort, from a product and technology standpoint, we are definitely there and differentiated. It’s been a lot about investing in our go-to-market efforts. And as we do it, both developing our in-house strength but as well as partnering, those things are beginning to pay dividends. And hopefully, you’ll hear more details at tomorrow’s conference.
Operator
Thank you. And our next question comes from Brian Nowak of Morgan Stanley. Your line is now open.
Brian Nowak
Thanks for taking my question there. I have two. The first one, the Google Assistant and the Hardware and Google Mini. I was curious, if you could just talk about sort of early learnings and differences in consumer behaviors, how they interact with those devices as opposed to mobile search and the phones? And they’re always very focused on the long-term value proposition for users and advertisers. Maybe talk about the focus, and the hardware is long-term for users and advertisers. And Sundar, I appreciate your color on India and Indonesia and emerging markets. Talk about how you’re strategically trying to position yourself for business potentially beyond advertising and payments or other areas in the countries, if you could, please?
Sundar Pichai
So on Google Assistant, obviously, we see Google Assistant as an important evolution. And obviously, it’s early days, but it’s already exciting to see. People definitely are pushing the boundaries of what they can do with these devices, and home control and automation is a good example of the kind of use case that’s very, very different consumer behavior and which is why our assets in Nest et cetera end up battling over time. So, there is a lot more actions, people are trying to get things done, which is definitely areas we are focused on. But, I think it’s important to understand that experience not just in the context Home and Home Mini, but also your core mobile experience, how it evolves on the phone and across the streams, you’ll have in your life. So, we’re taking the end-to-end user experience in mind, and that’s where all the investments we have done over many, many years I think will come into play as the product evolves.

On your question about emerging markets, the user growth there is extraordinary to see. And we’re seeing it across all our products. So, all our major products, products which have over a billion users each, they are all doing well in these markets. And so, that’s where most of the growth is going to from. And so, it’s an important area of focus. And we do see unique opportunities in these markets, which are different from the markets we are here in here in our more mature markets. You highlighted payments as a good example. And you’ve seen us address that exclusively with Google Tez in India. And so, we will look to do more like that. And beyond just getting our products working better, we’re going to opportunistic, we are investing in talent in these countries. And there is a lot of innovation, which is going to happen from these countries, both for their own markets and for the world beyond. And we want to be in a position to do that well.
Operator
And our next question comes from Doug Anmuth of JP Morgan. Your line is now open.
Doug Anmuth
Two, if I could. First, for Ruth. You talked about the higher cost, as you shift to machine learning driven business and then also your tech upgrade cycle around machine? Can you give us a sense of where you are in making those transitions and absorbing those investments from a cost perspective? And then, Sundar, mobile strength, clearly in the quarter. Can you just help us understand better how machine learning and AI or driving the stronger growth in mobile search and if there is any specific innovations or products you can point to that are driving that outsized growth? Thanks.
Ruth Porat
So, in terms of your first question and kind of machine learning, and I think you’re kind of getting at cycle. You’re really seeing it in two places, and part of that is they called out is with respect to OpEx. We’re hiring and what you’re seeing is the investments we’re making across the board, it’s ads, it’s cloud, it’s hardware, it’s the Assistant, but this is also very much in machine learning and we are really proud of the team that we have and given the opportunity set that they are able to address. And I think you were getting more broadly at CapEx. The way we’re focused on CapEx, as I said last quarter as well, we view this as it lands into our outlook for growth and the required additional compute capacity. And there are number of growth drivers there. And part is really to support growth that we are seeing in our search and ads business that’s really consistent with the momentum that we’ve commented on today and the exciting opportunities that we see to further enhance the user and advertiser experience. It’s also for our newer businesses, as I noted in opening comments. And then very importantly, it reflects the importance of machine learning across our products including search and ads.
We’ve talked about this in the past, machine learning is more compute intensive, but it also opens up more services and products across Alphabet, and that’s what we are investing in to make sure that we’ve got the capacity with best-in-class compute capacity. And so, the build is really machines, data centers and network infrastructure, and just to make sure and put a fine point on it, while we’re ensuring that we’re well positioned to support the growth we see. We do constantly remain focused on efficiency per unit of compute. We’ve talked about that on many prior calls and are investing here for long-term value creation thoughtfully in order to be able to pursue the opportunities that we see ahead of us.
Sundar Pichai
And Doug, on your question on how is machine learning driving the mobile search experience. The key thing is, it’s doing it at a deeper foundational level. We’ve obviously used machine learning across the board, be it our ranking, actually understanding the intent, the context around the query, and getting you the right answer. I think, the experience is -- I mean, the improvements are happening continuously. And so, we are -- I would just say we are getting deeper in terms of what we are able to do.

In terms of specific innovations of products, it’s super important to understand, I gave the Translate example earlier. While it may seem like a specific use case, it’s obviously -- obviously, we can do translate well because of machine learning. But where it helps us is, we want Google to be the source you think of when you run into a problem. And the fact that the data shows that during the World Cup in Russia, our usage spiked up. To me it shows that when people are running into new things, new experiences, when they have questions on their mind, Google is what they are reaching out to. And I think the way we continue to do that well is by increasingly by using machine learning. So, that’s the depth to which we think about this.
Operator
Thank you. And our next question comes from Anthony DiClemente of Evercore. Your line is now open.
Anthony DiClemente
Thank you very much. First for Sundar. You talked about Android in your prepared remarks. In your blog post you said that you are concerned that the Android ruling from the EC sends a troubling signal in favor of proprietary systems over open platform. So, I wonder how are you thinking about the possible business impact from this Android ruling, specifically on tying the Play Store from Search and the Chrome browser. And does it in any way change your strategic approach for Android going forward? And then, for Ruth, on the theme of OpEx investment trends, if we isolate just the other revenue businesses, Cloud, Play and Hardware, all growth drivers, but clearly structurally different in terms of the competitive landscape and profitability. You said, most of the headcount additions are in Cloud, but would love to understand more about how you prioritize investment across Cloud, Play and Hardware, those three? Thank you.
Sundar Pichai
On Android, I said in my blog post, Android has really worked well, I think globally for users for everyone in the ecosystem. You can clearly see there is robust competition. There is a lot of innovation, lower prices that has made Android possible at every price point. And so, I think overall, it’s created more choice for everyone, not less. We are analyzing the decision, and I think it’s too early to comment or speculate beyond what you’ve already said. But we will -- we will always take a constructive approach. We’ll appeal the Commission’s decision and take the due process available to us. But, we are also looking forward to finding a solution above all that preserves the enormous benefits of Android to users and so on. So, there is small work to be done, and I think it will become clearer as we go along. But I’m confident that we can find a way to make sure Android is available at scale to users, everyone.
Ruth Porat
And in terms of your question, on investment priorities, I think one of the most important points to underscore is that one of the biggest opportunities for investment, continues to be in our ads business where we are continuing to investment meaningfully, given the opportunity set that we see there. Sundar commented on some of them, as did I, looking at opportunities to enhance the user experience, to continue to improve tools for advertisers, and both of which extend the growth there. And that’s for mobile and what we are increasingly seeing, is, as we focus on mobile, the benefits are across platform and help explain the growth we’re seeing in desktop and YouTube. So, we are continuing to invest here. I don’t want to leave with an answer, with the notion that the investment is just pointed to the new business sets.
And then, more specifically to your question, what we look at is the opportunity set, the -- each one of these is different. When we start with cloud, as Sundar commented, given the core capabilities that we are building upon, our technical infrastructure, security app, machine learning, analytical tools, our view is that we’re addressing a rapidly growing market with the core pillars that are needed to win. And what has been the recurring theme that we’ve talked about on these calls is the need to further build out our go to market capabilities and ensure that we’ve got the functional requirements that enterprise customers deserver. So, it’s really looking at the scale of the opportunity, the pace of investment that can be done effectively and therefore position us well.

Our hardware business continues to deliver significant growth, particularly with the sales as a home family of products, and you’ve seen us invest there. We talked about the HTC acquisition last quarter because this is a scale business. And the ability to operate as effectively as possible underscores the types of investments we’re making. Play continues to benefit from broad-based app strength, it’s been a long standing strength of ours, and we’re continuing to invest as needed there.
Operator
Thank you. And our next question comes from the Mark Mahaney of RBC Capital Markets. Your line is now open.
Mark Mahaney
Great, thanks. Two questions. It seems like your commentary on cloud is very positive. It seems like that’s also what we’re hearing from Microsoft. And my guess is from Amazon what they are seeing. Do you think we’re just at a broad industry inflection point in terms of cloud adoption, and any thoughts as to why we’re saying it now? And then, a question on advertising, there is just big bucket of ad spend called trade promotion spend, that’s largely been offline I think, and it’s almost as big maybe on a global basis as kind of traditional TV brand advertising. Any thoughts on that as an opportunity, whether there’s an ability for that to really migrate heavily online and Google’s ability to tap into those dollars? Thank you very much.
Sundar Pichai
On the first question on cloud. For sure, I do think there is an inflection point. And that’s why, it feels far from zero-sum game. I think all the major players are definitely seeing traction. And to me, the reason is, typically when you look at enterprises, once you’ve deployed and you have an architecture, you try and stay on it as long as you can in many, many cases, but this change is hard. But, this is a case in which the benefits are super clear. And over time, I think, there is a tremendous cost to your business of being on the wrong architecture, especially if you need to digitally transform yourself, thinking through the cloud architecture becomes an important way by which you are improving your business. So, I think at a foundational level, it’s clearly there on everyone’s mind. It’s not just on CEOs are asking questions about cloud. Almost all businesses I deal with, I can clearly see the question is on the mind of their CEO. And so, I think it’s important.
I also think it’s going to be -- businesses are going to embrace multiple clouds over time too. So, I think not only is this early, but I think it is going to transform. And there is a lot of opportunity here. And our goal here is, it’s something we view -- this is something we have built experience over 20 years. And we are thoughtfully gaining strengthen and committed to it for the very long term.
Ruth Porat
And then, in terms of kind of trends in advertising, to your question. We have talked about this quite a bit in the past, over 90% of commerce is still offline, and we do see a great opportunity for digital to play a bigger role in that and tap into our budgets, into other budgets that have traditionally been there. And so, we are quite focused on the advertising opportunities, as said. And the fact that ad budgets are offline, and as we focus on, these are opportunity and the tools for advertisers, we see view that as another opportunity.
Operator
Thank you. And our next question comes from Dan Salmon of BMO Capital Markets. Your line is now open.
Dan Salmon
Hey. Good afternoon, everyone. Thanks for taking my question. Sundar, you mentioned in your prepared remarks or highlighted at least the launch of local campaigns at Marketing Live a couple of weeks ago. I recognize that’s an initiative that will help drive demand across a number of Google properties. I’m curious in particular about Maps, and with it being a product aimed at driving store visits, one would assume Maps would play an interesting part in that. And in the past, when we’ve asked you about Maps, it was focused more on getting the user experience right. So, my question is, do you see local campaigns as something that drives a bit of incremental level of monetization of Maps.

Sundar Pichai
Okay. I think it’s a good question. Local is an extraordinary use case in mobile. Local mobile searches are growing faster than mobile searches for us and have increased by almost 50% in the last year alone. And we are continuing to invest in building a local experience that benefits merchants, users and advertisers. And local campaigns is something new which we announced at Google Marketing Live a couple of weeks ago. It’s a new campaign where if you are a local business, it’s designed to drive foot traffic to you. You provide us with your budget, business locations and creatives, and we use machine learning to automatically optimize the ads to appear across our properties. Right? And along with that, you’ve rightly noticed that we are beginning to experiment with new ad format, which we have had in beta, but we’re pushing on them a bit more in Maps itself, both promoted places and place page ads.
So, these are important ways by which we are exploring the commercial opportunity around Maps. I’ve always felt Maps is a tremendous asset we have. And we’ve really focused on the user side of things. And we will continue to do so, because the growth is very, very high. So, we see a lot of headroom. But as that experience is -- as we get a better understand of it, we are developing our views on how we can bring monetization experiences. And so, these are all steps in that direction. But, we’ll take it’s slows and we’ll continue to evolve it here.
Operator
And our question comes from Brent Thill of Jefferies. Your line is now open. 
Brent Thill
Ruth, the U.S. and Asia business has accelerated sequentially modestly, but Europe was down a touch. And I think there have been many questions around did GDPR have any impact, and Sundar said it was too early to call. But, is that just completely unrelated to what happened or maybe there is something else that’s going on that resulted from the small downtick?
Ruth Porat
Yes. I mean, the way we look at it is, we’re pleased with the strength in each of the regions at 19% year-on-year growth in EMEA and a fixed basis where we’re pleased with the strength in the business. And as Sundar said, I think it’s too early to comment on GDPR. We then hope that that’s geographic split gives you better sense of what’s kind of the dynamics in each of the various region. And as we both commented on, as long as you raise the regional question, I’ve got to comment on APAC here, really pleased with the growth, 34% on a fixed FX basis and it underscores Sundar’s comments about terrific products and rapidly growing markets, as well as the superb leadership group. Mobile strength is the key there as well, and we’re very pleased about the breadth by the country that we’re seeing, we’re very focused on the region. So, as we look across the globe, pleased with the fact that it is -- all regions are contributing nicely.
Brent Thill
And a quick follow-up for Sundar. You mentioned on the cloud business that you’re getting strong traction among some of the big fundamental institutions. One of the big questions we get is around the heavily regulated industries like healthcare, financial. It feels like you’re starting to get better referenceability there. Are you happy with where you sit across the more heavily regulated industries now versus the tech-focused industries where you sit right now?
Sundar Pichai
Definitely, and I think that’s where a lot of our investments have gone in, right, getting certifications needed, depending on the industry and building the features that you need. And that’s clearly starting to have an impact, and both on GCP, but as well as G Suite. And so, we definitely are going to continue to build out our capabilities. And we’ll be going after the opportunities in these areas very seriously.

Operator
And our next question comes from Colin Sebastian of Robert W. Baird. Your line is now open.
Colin Sebastian
I have a couple, maybe first going back to the commerce theme. I wanted to ask about Shopping Actions and level of adoption you might be seeing with that formats. And more generally, what do you envision monetization for Google Assistant, if we should still expect to see more of a transactional event to that platform? And then on TAC, in wonder if it’s worth adding a more color perhaps in the tiny or how much of the second quarter benefited from the moderation in growth in sites TAC just so we can get a better sense as to how to model that expense item over the next few quarters?
Sundar Pichai
Colin, on Google Assistant and Shopping Actions, there I do think it’s been exciting to see the improvement there, but I still would like that experience they’ve all a lot more before we play around with monetization. And in all of these areas, we always set a high bar to make sure the user experience is working well. You have seen us do that with Maps or something like that.
And I think today while we have taken promising steps with Shopping Actions for all of us to really work well and to delight users. I still feel we have some work ahead of us and that’s what we are focused on. So, we will stay focused there, get the experience and then that will give us new avenues to monetize it. I've seen this with YouTube now, beyond ads we are experimenting with a lot of new formats, and the same thing here. So, I am pretty confident of our ability to do that well, if we get the user experience right.
Ruth Porat
And then in terms of TAC, as we’ve talked about in the past TAC as a percentage of revenues is affected by quite a number of factors. The main point is that we do continue to expect the TAC rate to increase on a year-on-year basis. And the primary reason is when we talked about really in the past that it’s the underlying shift to mobile which carries higher TACs than desktop. So, on a year-on-year basis, that’s the trend that you are really seeing as the ongoing strength in mobile.
Over the past four quarters, changes in partnership agreements have also been a driver of increases in the TAC rate and then there are host of other factors that we’ve talked about they can have an impact in any quarter like device mix or partner mix or mix of organic and pay distribution points.
And so, as we called out last quarter, we did expect the pace of year-on-year growth in the sites TAC rate to slow beginning in this quarter, the second quarter, and you can clearly see that in the data. And as we’ve repeatedly said, it is most effective to focus on year-on-year changes given the significance of this shift to mobile and mobile growth. And so variations in quarter-on-quarter move are less instructive.
Operator
Thank you. And our next question comes from Michael Nathanson of MoffettNathanson. Your line is now open.
Michael Nathanson
One for Sundar and one for Ruth. Sundar, firstly. You went through a lot of your initiatives in your opening comments, but didn’t mention Verily. So can you talk a bit about what the bottlenecks are then to be solved by you or your clients before you can scale the Verily opportunity? And then for Ruth, you’ve been clear on the CapEx ramp is due to you are investing ahead of growth. What is usual timeframe do you think, do you see where those investments to pay off? And what factors would make the CapEx to sale ratio start growing even faster from here? Those were my questions.
Sundar Pichai
Broadly, Verily is clearly set up us an other bet, and they are doing really important work on healthcare, if we look at the recent progress on their diabetes monitoring and so on. So they’re in deep work and they have a lot more talk about. Across healthcare, we see a big opportunity for both Google and Alphabet. It’s a vertical, which is very important for Cloud. And we are obviously helping a lot of healthcare partners across their needs. And Verily is definitely doing a very specialized solutions in this area. And we’ll have a lot more to say on all of this over the course of time.

Ruth Porat
And then, with respect to CapEx, look, I think, our view is that what you are saying here is an aggressive piece of investment, given our outlook for growth. And as I said the required additional Compute capacity, we are quite focused on the kind of full resource utilization across businesses. If I go back to couple of years when we incorporated stock-based compensation into the way we are talking about the businesses, I made the point that that is helpful, both externally and internally, and looking at resource utilization, the same is clearly true of CapEx. And we are quite focused on long-term value creation, focused on ensuring that we’re pursuing attractive opportunities in a prudent, appropriate way to capture the opportunity while making sure that we’re looking at the full again resource requirement. So, at this point, that’s an interesting way of framing the question, how does it grow even faster from here. We’re quite focused on this thing, an aggressive piece and an appropriate one, given the opportunities that we see, and it is a class data centers, machines and network infrastructure as I said.
Operator
Thank you. And our final question comes from the line of Justin Post of Merrill Lynch. Your line is now open.
Justin Post
Thank you. I just want to get into website growth. First, maybe you can help us a little bit understand strength in mobile search. Are there new any ad formats or ad changes? You mentioned local, anything to call out there? And then, just wondering, given the YouTube controversies last year, did YouTube accelerate this quarter? And what are some of the big content areas that you are investing in? Thank you.
Ruth Porat
So, in terms of sites revenue, I think, our view is ongoing strength reflects our focus on improving the user experience and enhancing tools for advertisers. And both Sundar and I have spoken about them. We’ve got an intense focus on innovation that we’ve discussed previously that’s enabled us to deliver over a 100 innovations each quarter. And really exciting area is the benefit of machine learning. It’s a valuable driver of our growth, not only enhancing experiences for users but the tools that we talked about for advertisers and for app developers, certainly helping them find the right audience, to be able to optimize campaigns at scale, to deliver more relevant and higher quality ads. Sundar talked about a number of them. The Google Marketing Live, we’ve really highlighted what we’re seeing there and the benefits, whether we’re talking about responsive search ads or local campaigns, smart shopping campaigns, another great example is universal app campaigns. So, across the board. And again, I made this comment previously about the benefit we’re seeing on mobile is extending to the growth opportunities across platforms.
Sundar Pichai
Yes. And I’d add that a good way to think about it is, today, there is a lot of complexity you need to deal with to have advertiser, and increasingly we are using machine learning to do all the hard work and get them to focus on the business problem they are trying to solve. And that turns out to be a big driver overall.
On YouTube, we definitely are continuing to see great product momentum, it’s the user adoption and interest and our metrics are very strong, continues to grow and the growth is global. And we see it across many, many verticals. And overall, we’ve invested a lot in making sure we are delivering the content responsibly. And it’s been a big area of focus across Google. We are investing a lot in people to review the content that’s going, improving the policies. And again, using machine learning to make all of this work better. And I think people are noticing it including our advertisers and they’re engaging with the platform more. So, I would say overall, there is a lot of momentum there. And I’m excited about it.

Operator
Thank you. And that concludes our question-and-answer session for today. I’d like to turn the conference back over to Ellen West for any closing remarks. 
Ellen West
Great. Thanks everyone for joining us today. We look forward to speaking with you again on our third quarter call.
Operator
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for participating in today’s conference. This does conclude the program and you may all disconnect. Everyone, have a great day.General Electric Company (NYSE:GE) Q2 2018 Results Earnings Conference Call July 20, 2018  8:30 AM ET
Executives
Matt Cribbins - VP, Investor Communications
John Flannery - Chairman and CEO
Jamie Miller - CFO
Analysts
Scott Davis - Melius Research
Andy Kaplowitz - Citigroup
Jeff Sprague - Vertical Research
Andrew Obin - Bank of America Merrill Lynch
Steve Tusa - JP Morgan
Nicole DeBlase - Deutsche Bank
Julian Mitchell - Barclays
Steven Winoker - UBS
Operator
Good day, ladies and gentlemen, and welcome to the General Electric Second Quarter 2018 Earnings Conference Call. At this time, all participants are in a listen-only mode. My name is Christine and I will be your conference coordinator today. [Operator Instructions] As a reminder, this conference is being recorded.
I would now like to turn the program over to your host for today’s conference, Matt Cribbins, Vice President of Investor Communications. Please proceed.
Matt Cribbins
Good morning and welcome to GE’s second quarter earnings webcast. I’m joined by our Chairman and CEO, John Flannery; CFO, Jamie Miller; and our new Head of IR Todd Ernst.
Before we start, I would like to remind you that the press release, presentation and supplemental have been available since earlier today on our investor website at www.ge.com/investor. Please note that some of the statements we are making today are forward-looking and are based on our best view of the world and our businesses as we see them today. As described in our SEC filings and on our website, those elements can change as the world changes.
And now, I will turn the call over to John Flannery.
John Flannery
Thanks, Matt.
The second quarter was an important one for GE. We’ve described 2018 as a reset year; and in the quarter, we made significant progress on that journey. At an overall Company level, we laid out our path to a simpler and stronger GE by announcing our broad portfolio of strategy going forward to drive shareholder value. The core of GE will consist of our Aviation, Power and Renewables businesses. We also announced our plans to move our Healthcare, BHGE and Transportation businesses out of the GE core to enable and pursue more focused growth strategies as standalone companies.
We made significant ongoing progress on our tactical priorities. We have now closed the sales of Industrial Solutions and Value-Based Care. We also announced the merger of our Transportation business with Wabtec and our sale of Distributed Power. This essentially completes the announcement or actual closing of our target of $20 billion of dispositions. We moved on this with deliberation but with an eye for value as well. We are materially shrinking the size of GE Capital with planned asset reductions of $25 billion over the next two years. We continue to take out structural costs. We’ve achieved $1.1 billion in cost out through the first six months, and we are on track to exceed our goal of $2 billion. We also announced changes in our operating model that allow us to take out an additional $500 million plus at Corporate by 2020.
The aviation market continues to be very strong. We had a strong orders quarter and a good week at the Farnborough airshow with $22.6 billion of wins. The biggest challenge we face continues to be working through the turnaround of our Power business. The market continues to be difficult with softness in orders putting pressure on our cash flow and working capital. The team continues to focus on rightsizing footprint, reducing base cost, improving quality, and maximizing value of our installed base. This transformation is taking place in the context of a very dynamic macro environment. Overall, economic activity remains solid in most parts of the world. I made trips to Europe and to China and Korea in the past six weeks, and we continue to watch the global trade picture carefully. Our businesses see significant opportunities, both in Europe and Asia. And it was also a chance for me to see the very strong GE teams winning on the ground.

In terms of business performance in the quarter, our overall results were in line with our expectations. Adjusted EPS was $0.19 with particularly performances in Aviation and Healthcare and a good performance in Oil and Gas. Free cash flow was $258 million, about what we expected for the quarter. Through the first half, cash is about $1 billion better than last year. I’m pleased that we’re executing well on cash, meeting or beating our plan across all businesses, except Power. Given that ongoing market challenges and related volatility in Power, we anticipate free cash flow will be approximately $6 billion for the year. Orders were up 1% organically. Organic revenue was down 6%. And margins were down 80 basis points organically. And I’ll share more details on those metrics in the next few pages.
Overall, we are executing on our framework and the plan we laid out for you in June. This plan was built around driving shareholder value by focusing the portfolio for growth, delevering and derisking the Company and operating in a new, decentralized manner. The team is energized by our path forward. And we made solid progress in the first half of the year and will continue to execute. We expect earnings and cash pressure in Power will be offset by strength in Aviation and Healthcare, and lower corporate cost. Renewables, Transportation, and Oil and Gas should be about as expected. Our current rollup for EPS is as at the low end of the range we’ve guided to of $1 to $1.07.
And next on to orders. First quarter orders totaled $31 billion, up 11% reported and up 1% organically. Equipment and services orders were both up 1% organically. We saw strength in equipment orders in Aviation, Healthcare and Transportation. Power was down 29% and Renewables was down 34% on tougher comps. We had good service orders growth in five of seven businesses with strong spares in Aviation and repower in Renewables. Power services declined 22%.
I’ll take you through some of the market highlights on the right. As I said earlier, Power remains challenging. First half trends continue to point to a market less than 30 gigawatts in 2018, which is down from 34 gigawatts last year and 48 gigawatts in 2016. We are planning for the environment to be in this range through 2020. In Aviation, Healthcare and Renewables, we see a lot of opportunities for growth. Aviation markets are robust. Global revenue passenger kilometers grew 6.8% year-to-date with strong growth, both domestically and internationally. Air freight volumes grew 5.3%. Load factors continue to be strong. As I mentioned earlier, we had another very successful week in Farnborough. David and the team led the airshow with $22.6 billion of orders and commitments.
In Healthcare, we saw strength in the U.S., up 6% organically and emerging markets up 5%. Europe continues to see modest growth, up 2%. I was with our Healthcare team in China last week, and they had another strong quarter with orders up 10%. The market continues to be robust and the team recently launched the Pioneer MR that helped contribute the 19% MR growth in China. Our Renewables orders were down in the quarter, but we continue to see strong global demand for Onshore Wind. Our onshore backlog is up 43% year-over-year. And although pricing remains challenging, it is improving. Overall, the majority of the markets we are in are strong and growing, and we see good opportunity for growth.
Next, I will go through our results on revenue, margins and costs. Industrial segment revenues were $29 billion, up 4% reported and down 6% organic. The difference is due mainly to the impact of the Baker Hughes acquisition. Aviation saw very strong growth of 13% and Healthcare was up 4%. As expected, Power, Oil and Gas, Transportation and Renewables had negative organic revenues. Jamie will walk through each of the businesses in more detail.

Industrial margins were 10.4% in the second quarter, down 160 basis points. Organically, margins were down 80 basis points in the quarter, but are up 40 basis points for the half on strong cost out. Aviation margins were down 110 basis points on higher LEAP shipments, but are up 110 basis points at the half. We expect Aviation margins will expand in the year. Power margins were down 500 basis points in the quarter, primarily due to lower volume in price. Structural cost reduction remains on track. We reduced cost, an additional $300 million in the second quarter, bringing the total for the first half to $1.1 billion versus our full year target of $2 billion.
We continue to look aggressively at all cost out opportunities. We’ve begun implementing the actions we outlined in June to run the Company with the businesses as the center of gravity. This will result in at least $500 million of incremental corporate cost out through 2020. And with that, I’ll hand it over to Jamie.
Jamie Miller
Thanks, John.
On the consolidated results, second quarter revenues were $30.1 billion up 3% reported. Industrial revenues were $27.7 billion, up 4% reported with the industrial segments also up 4% but down 6% organically. For the quarter, adjusted EPS was $0.19, down 10% from the second quarter of 2017. The industrial businesses delivered $0.21 of EPS, down 9%, driven by continued softness in Power, partially offset by strength in Aviation and Healthcare. GE Capital contributed negative $0.02 in the quarter, which I’ll cover later in the GE Capital results.
Continuing EPS was $0.08 and included $0.15 of costs related to restructuring and other, non-operating pension and benefit costs, and tax charges related to the planned separation of GE Healthcare. It also includes $0.05 of gains and other marks, which I’ll cover in more detail on the next page. Net EPS of $0.07 includes discontinued operations. Adjusted industrial free cash flow was $258 million for the quarter, down by about $100 million from prior year. I will walk through more details on our cash performance on the next couple of pages.
The reported GE tax rate was 39%, which was higher than previously expected due to the approximate $200 million tax charge to restructure our operations related to the planned separation of GE Healthcare. The adjusted industrial tax rate was 18%.
On the right side of the segment results, industrial segment op profit was down 4%, driven by double-digit declines in Power, Renewables and Transportation, partially offset by solid growth in Aviation and Healthcare. Industrial operating profit, which includes Corporate, was down 11%. Through the half industrial segment op profit was down 3%.
Next, I will go through a walk of earnings per share. Net EPS was $0.07 including losses and discontinued operations of $0.01 related to trailing cost from the GE Capital exit plan and the reserve for an unfavorable tax resolution related to a prior disposition. EPS from continuing operations was $0.08, this included $0.02 of gains primarily related to the sale of Industrial Solutions to ABB. On industrial restructuring and other item, we incurred $0.08 of charges; $0.05 was related to ongoing cost out actions at Corporate, Power and Renewables. We also incurred a $0.01 in our Oil and Gas segment, which represents our portion of Baker Hughes GE’s restructuring, and $0.03 related to the planned separation of GE Healthcare and the small impact related to other tax reform adjustments.
For the year, we expect restructuring to be about $2.7 billion pretax, ex-Baker Hughes GE. In the quarter, we also had a $0.02 favorable mark-to-market related to our equity investment in Pivotal. The company IPOed in April; and as required by GAAP accounting for equity securities, we marked our investment to fair value, based on the publicly traded share price as of the end of June. This non-operating item is not included in our $1 to $1.07 EPS guidance for the year. Any future marks for this investment will continue to be backed out of our adjusted EPS each quarter in 2018. Finally, non-operating pension and benefit costs were $0.06, which gets you to an adjusted EPS of $0.19.

Next, I’ll cover cash. Our total industrial free cash flow was negative $600 million in the quarter. This represents total GE, including 100% of Baker Hughes GE free cash flow. Adjusting for pension plan contributions, deal taxes and Baker Hughes GE on a dividend basis, our adjusted industrial free cash flow was $258 million. This was up significantly from the negative cash flow of $1.7 billion that we reported last quarter.
Adjusted industrial free cash flow year-to-date was negative $1.4 billion and that is up $1 billion compared to last year. Overall, second quarter free cash flow performance was in line with expectations. Continued weakness in Power was offset by strength in other business segments.
If we continue on the right, you can see the drivers of the second quarter cash performance. Income depreciation and amortization totaled $2.2 billion. Working capital usage was negative $900 million for the quarter. The primary driver was net liquidation of progress collections in our Power segment, reflecting a challenging new orders dynamic. Excluding Power, working capital was flat, indicative of a normal business cycle and the other businesses. We saw a cash usage in these businesses through buildup of receivables and inventory, which was funded by a similar increase in payables and progress collections.
Contract assets were a cash usage of $500 million this quarter, driven by $400 million of deferred inventory build in our Renewables segment due to timing of units that were shipped but not rev rec. We expect to recognize these units in the second half. In addition, we had about $300 million of usage in our long-term services agreements portfolio, primarily driven by revenue in excess of billings. This was partially offset by $200 million of cash collections ahead of revenue on equipment contracts. Other cash flows were flat in the period.
We spent $800 million in capital expenditures to support growth in our business segments. This was down $300 million versus prior year, reflecting our focus on rightsizing investment spend. For the year, the continued challenges we are seeing in power are putting pressure on our total year adjusted industrial free cash flow outlook. We currently expect it to be about $6 billion, reflecting the tougher Power market dynamics, which is offsetting strength in other businesses.
Cash on hand ex-Baker Hughes GE of $8.9 billion is down $2.9 billion versus year-end. At the half, we’ve used $1.4 billion of adjusted industrial free cash flow and have paid out $2.1 billion in quarterly dividend. We received $2.3 billion in cash from business dispositions, primarily from the sale of our Industrial Solutions business to ABB that closed this quarter. Additionally, we had 1.1 billion of investing activity, primarily related to $900 million of activity in our Aviation business in the first quarter where we acquired IP assets for $700 million as well as a minority shareholding in Arcam for $200 million, one of our additive businesses.
Debt went up by $800 million, primarily driven by debt related to pension funding. And as we had previously disclosed, we will be making total contributions of $6 billion in 2018 to our U.S principal pension plan, which includes contributions in the first half of $900 million. These contributions are being funded by utilizing excess debt in GE Capital. The $1.3 billion change in other is comprised of $900 million of pension plan funding made this year that I previously mentioned, as well as other timing items during the year. We plan to end the year at more than $15 billion of cash. The principal drivers in the second half are free cash flow and dividends for the remainder of the year. In addition, we are expecting to receive approximately $5 billion from disposition proceeds and will have cash usage from the exercise of the $3 billion of Alstom puts in the fourth quarter.

Now, I will take you through the second quarter results by segment. For Power, orders of $7.4 billion were down 26% with equipment down 29% and services down 22%. Equipment was down, primarily in gas power systems, which was down 78%. This was driven by lower gas turbine orders of 7 units versus 24 last year, lower balance of plant, down 600 million, and less aero derivatives orders of 3 versus 12 last year. We have 82 gas turbine units in backlog, including 33 H units. Services orders were down 22% and down 17% excluding the water disposition. Contractual orders were down 5%, principally on lower upgrades and averages. Transactional orders were down 30%, driven by lower upgrades in parts.
Revenue of $7.6 billion was down 19% with both equipment and services down double digits. Lower equipment revenues were driven by gas turbine shipments of 7 versus 21 units, and aero units of 5 versus 17 in the prior year. We expect to ship about 50 gas turbines this year with 90% in backlog today. Aero shipments are estimated to be around 30 units with about 55% in backlog. Shipments for both are in line with total year expectations.
Services revenues were down 15% and down 8% excluding water. CSA revenue was down 8% on lower outages, unfavorable mix of contract scope, and lower long-term service agreement gain. Utilization on CSA units continues to perform as expected and in line with last year. Transactional services revenues were down 21% on fewer upgrades and outages. Transactional revenues were also impacted by several large transactions of about $200 million where commercial closure moved to the second half. In total, services revenue should be stronger in the second half. However, we will continue to have year-over-year pressure from CSA outage and contract mix.
Operating profit of $421 million was down on lower volume price and unfavorable productivity and mix. Structural cost-out totaled $212 million in the quarter and $566 million for the first half. We are on track for $1 billion of cost out for the total year end.
The Power business had another challenging quarter. As John mentioned, the market continues to be soft, and we have seen new orders in both gas turbines and aero derivatives moving out to the second half. We have visibility to a solid pipeline of activity in the second half. However, the timing of closing on these orders remains difficult to forecast. We expect orders to be better in the second half versus the first half, and about flat with last year. We’re making progress on operational improvements, but this is a multiyear process.
Our lead time on H turbines is down about 15% and we have implemented ERP systems that will provide greater visibility earlier on cost positions and scheduling issues in our project business. We continue to make progress on upgrading our transactional service technical sales and capabilities. We have visibility to 90% of the non-CSA GE units over the last year and have initiated commercial actions on 80% of these units.
We are focused on gaining traction in winning new business with transactional revenues up 5% for the first half. We expect to see improvement in the second half, especially as we move into the fourth quarter. As is typical with this business, as we look to the second half, we are backend loaded to the fourth quarter. No change to our prior comments on Power performance for the year, but clearly we are very focused on operational change and improvements.
On Renewables, orders were down 15% in the quarter, driven principally by Onshore Wind down 18% on lower wind turbine volume and down 44% on unit. This was partially offset by higher onshore service orders, up 2.6 times versus last year. The decline in wind turbine orders is principally driven by timing. Year-to-date Onshore Wind orders are flat with last year. Pricing for new units in the quarter improved sequentially, but were still lower than last year. Backlog for the total business grew 32% to $16.5 billion with onshore up 43%. Revenues were down 29%, principally on lower Onshore Wind turbine deliveries, down 54% on units. This was partially offset by onshore services up 44%.

Operating profit was down 48%, driven by lower volume and unfavorable pricing, partially offset by better cost performance. Backlog continues to expand in this business, based on strength in Onshore Wind. The team is investing and building capacity and is very focused on ensuring that we have the capability to deliver on a large second half ramp-up in shipments. The Onshore Wind business has about 70% of the expected second half new units in repower sales in backlog today, with good visibility to the remaining 30%. This along with continued strong service growth should put us on track for revenue growth in line with our prior guidance, 7% to 10% organic. We continue to bring product costs down, and we expect to see benefit from those actions, as we deliver volume in the second half.
Next, on Aviation. Orders in the quarter were up 29% to $9.5 billion. Equipment orders grew 62%, driven by commercial engine orders which were up 90% as a result of key wins in GEnx, up 9x; and continued LEAP momentum, up 37%. Military engine orders were up 19%, largely driven by U.S. Navy 414 order. Service orders grew 9%. Not included in orders are $22.6 billion of wins at list price for GE and CFM from the Farnborough airshow with engines of about $19 billion and services of about $4 billion. We saw a significant activity in key commercial engine segments including LEAP with $12 billion of when and GEnx and GE 90 of $5 billion. Revenues in the quarter grew 13% to $7.5 billion. Equipment revenue was up 24% on higher commercial and military engine shipments.
We shipped 250 LEAP engines this quarter with improving cost positions versus 69, a year ago and 186 in the prior quarter. Services revenues grew 8%, with the spares rate of 26.6 million per day, up 23% versus prior year. This was partially offset by lower CSA revenue. Operating profit of $1.5 billion was up 7% on higher volume, improved year-over-year price, and operating productivity. Operating profit margins were pressured by 110 basis points in the quarter, principally due to unfavorable mix on higher LEAP shipments.
As I said earlier, we shipped 250 LEAP engines in the quarter. And for the first half, we have delivered 436 versus 459 for all of 2017. We are about four weeks behind schedule but are making good progress on our commitment to recover on LEAP deliveries by year-end and remain on track for 1,100 to 1,200 engines in 2018. For the year, David and the team are on track to deliver 15-plus-percent op profit growth.
Next, on Healthcare. Orders of $5.3 billion were up 7% and 5% organically. Geographically, organic orders were up 6% in the U.S and 2% in Europe. Emerging market organic orders were up 5% with China up 10%. On a product line basis, Life Sciences orders were up 12% reported and 9% organic with bioprocess strong, up 14% organic. Healthcare Systems orders were up 6% reported and 4% organically. Healthcare revenues of $5 billion grew 6% reported and 4% on an organic basis with Healthcare Systems up 4% and Life Sciences up 5%. Emerging markets continue to be strong, up 10% organically, while developed markets were up 2%.
Operating profit of $926 million was up 12% reported and 10% organic, driven by continued volume growth in productivity. Margins expanded 100 basis points in the quarter as material deflation and cost productivity more than offset price pressure. The Healthcare team is making progress on portfolio actions. The sale of the Value-Based Care portfolio of Healthcare Digital to Veritas Capital was completed on July 10th.
Next on Oil and Gas. Baker Hughes GE released its financial results this morning at 6:45, and Lorenzo and his team will hold their earnings call with investors today at 9:30. Since we had the one year anniversary of the merger of Oil and Gas with Baker Hughes in July, this will be the last quarter that I provide a comparison of the combined business based on financials as if the merger had taken place on 1/1 of 2017. For reference, I’ll give you the total organic orders and revenue comparisons as well. These represent the results of our legacy Oil and Gas business.

Orders were $6 billion, up 95% reported and up 2% organic. On a combined basis, orders were up 9%. The Oil and Gas market continues to grow as crude oil prices have remained relatively stable. Our short cycle businesses are already benefiting from this, which is driving the growth this quarter, particularly in the upstream oilfield services business, which was up 13% year-over-year. Our outlook for long cycle is becoming more constructive, and we saw a good growth in oilfield equipment orders which were up 30% on a large award from Chevron for the Gorgon stage 2 project. This was offset partially by turbomachinery and process solutions down 4% and digital solutions down 6%.
Revenues were $5.6 billion, up 85% reported and down 12% organic. On a combined business basis, revenues were up 2%. Short cycle oilfield services and digital solutions revenues were up 14% and 7%, respectively, while the longer cycle oilfield equipment and turbomachinery and process solutions were down 9% and 13%, respectively. Operating profit was $222 million, up 86% reported and down about 27% organic, driven by declines in our longer cycle oilfield equipment and turbomachinery businesses, partially offset by synergy.
During the quarter, cash distributions from BHGE totaled $439 million, including the share repurchases and the quarterly dividend of $125 million. Lorenzo and Brian will provide more details on their call today. We are pleased with the team’s execution on strategic goals of growing share and improving cash and margins. The integration is going well with 189 million of synergies in the quarter and is on track for 700 million for the year.
Next, on Transportation. North American carload volume was up 5% in the quarter, primarily driven by intermodal carloads up 7% and commodity carloads up 4%. Parked locomotives continued to improve, ending the quarter down about 31% from last year. Orders of $1.1 billion were up 42% with equipment orders of $486 million, up 110%. We received orders for 115 locomotives, principally from North American customers versus 26 in the second quarter of ‘17. Additionally, we continue to see strong growth in mining wheels with unit orders up 115%.
Services orders of $620 million were up 13%, driven by double-digit growth in both locomotives and mining. Backlog was up $300 million versus prior year to $18.3 billion with equipment up 30% and services down 7%. Revenues of $942 million were down 13% with equipment down 40% on lower loco volume. We shipped 7 North American locomotives this quarter versus 37 in the second quarter of 2017. International unit shipments were 47 in the quarter versus 83 in the second quarter of ‘17. This was partially offset by mining, which was up 109%. Services revenue was up 12%, driven by locomotive and mining parts growth.
Operating profit of $155 million was down 15% due to lower locomotive volume, partly offset by services growth. We announced in May that our transportation business will be merging with Wabtec. The deal is progressing and we expect it to close in early 2019.
Moving over to Lighting. Revenues for the segment were down 9% with Current up 6% and the legacy lighting business down 26%. Revenues for the segment were up 6% organically. Operating profit was $24 million, up from $17 million last year. In the second quarter, we closed on the majority of our sale of our Europe, Middle East, Africa, Turkey and global automotive lighting businesses. These businesses represented approximately 15% of Current and Lighting’s annual revenues. We expect to sign a deal to sell the remainder of Current and Lighting by the end of 2018.
Finally, I will cover GE Capital. Continuing operations generated a loss of $207 million in the quarter, down 20%. We had a $38 million charge associated with the upfront cost of calling approximately $700 million of excess debt, which will be accretive by the end of 2019. Compared to last year, the business recorded lower gains and higher impairments, primarily related to EFS, which was mostly offset by higher base earnings and lower cost. As mentioned previously, for the year, we’re targeting to be about breakeven on continuing net income. We expect to have higher income in the second half, driven by lower excess debt costs, incremental tax benefits in the fourth quarter and additional asset sale gains. The timing of asset sales could impact the exact outcome.

GE Capital ended the quarter with $136 billion of assets including $16 billion of liquidity. We paid down $7 billion of long-term during the quarter and reduced our commercial paper program by $1 billion, which is in line with our overall capital allocation framework.
As we announced in January, we modified on July 1st, the internal GE Capital preferred stock to be mandatorily convertible into common equity in January 2021. Remember, this was a back-to-back arrangement with GE. So, the modification does not change the terms of the external GE preferred stock. In January 2021, the GE preferred stock becomes callable, and we will make a decision about this as part of our overall capital structure at that time. Our strategy with respect to GE Capital remains clear. We intend to materially shrink the balance sheet of GE Capital. We’re making progress on our target reduction of $25 billion in energy and industrial finance assets by the end of 2019. We sold approximately $2 billion of assets in the second quarter and expect to exit more than $10 billion of assets in the second half.
With that, I’ll turn it back over to John.
John Flannery
Thanks, Jamie. In summary, we see continued strength in Aviation, Healthcare and corporate costs in the second half. This will offset pressure in Power. Renewables, Transportation and Oil and Gas should be about as expected. Cost out was $1.1 billion in the first half, on track to be better than $2 billion target. We are aggressively reviewing all cost out opportunities for the second half. We are targeting GE Capital earnings to be breakeven for the total year due to portfolio actions. We expect the second half to be better than the first half.
GE is on a multiyear transformational journey, and the path forward is clear. Overall, we feel good about our execution. We see strength across the majority of the portfolio. We remain focused on implementing the broad macro strategic changes we outlined in June, while making sure our micro execution in each business continues to improve across the Company.
And with that Matt, I will turn it back over to you.
Matt Cribbins
Thanks, John. With that, let’s open up the call for questions.
Question-and-Answer Session
Operator
[Operator Instructions] Our first question comes from Scott Davis of Melius Research. Please go ahead.
Scott Davis
Great. Thanks, operator. Good morning, guys and gals. The Power business, it continues to get a bit worse it seems, and the news flow just continues to get worse. I guess, the question is, the original restructuring plan, when you look at it now, is it enough, and can you get enough? With the agreements that you have with the French government, is it even possible to take out enough capacity to get close to matching up supply and demand on that?
John Flannery
So, Scott, let me just start out saying, it’s clearly our top priority, is managing through and fixing our issues in the Power business. So, we’re working that intensely, in total sense of urgency. The market is challenging, but we need to work through that. It’s going to be a multiyear fix, I think with some volatility. This is not something that’s going to move straight line quarter-to-quarter. But, let me take it in three pieces really, one is just the market; two is now we’re fixing it; and then, just as we look into ‘19 and beyond. I’ll start with market. So, we’re looking basically 50% down last two years, we’re planning for this to stay at those levels. So, we’re not looking for any rebound there.
On the installed base side, the industry is not going way. I think, if you look at every forecast, recent forecast, Bloomberg and others that the amount of electricity generated by gas turbines will increase. So, we think there is something substantial to build around it longer term here, and our strategy is to restructure the business and maximize the value.

We’ve got five basic things, Scott, in the plan here in terms of addressing this. One is rightsizing the footprint and the base cost. I think, the team made good progress on that. We’re about 550 and $560 million of cost out in the first half; we’ll be ahead of the target on $1 billion out.
Then maximizing value of installed base, again, we’ve gone through that with you before, but we continue to make progress and thinking, improving our visibility, improving our commercial execution, sales incentives pricing controls. So, I think the team -- we’ve got execution and quality and then liquidated damages and in cycle time. Selling core -- non-core assets IS sold, BP announced, low voltage motors and changes to management. So, we see a very clear plan of what we need to do there.
The market continues to be a challenge. And so, what we announced today, Scott, was this -- we see pressure on orders. We’re going to continue to have to take additional cost out. We’re going to continue to have to restructure the footprint. We can do that. We will do that. But, it’s going to take some time. So, I don’t see any change to our core strategy with the business, our core approach to what we see in the market. But, I agree with your point that it’s going to take more ongoing actions here, and that’s what the team is focused on.
And I think as we look beyond 2019 and beyond, we’re already working with an assumption of a very challenging market. So, we had 107 gas turbines last year, we’re about half of that this year, we’re not expecting any improvement on that. We have the commercial teams intensely focused and getting our fair share, but make sure we’re disciplined on the terms of that. And we just continue to grind down the footprint and the base cost. So, I think, big picture, the industry is not going away, the short-term cycle is severe, and we’ve got to manage through that. But there has been asset worth maintaining and preserving and expanding the value here.
Scott Davis
Just quickly, you guys haven’t really given us a number yet on what you think the run rate corporate expense is, once all the Healthcare spend and Transportation, once it all occurs. I mean, what -- do you have a sense of how much it takes in pure dollars of sense to run a company like GE from a corporate perspective?
Jamie Miller
Yes, Scott. From a corporate perspective, so, for this year, we’re looking at between 1.2 and $1.3 billion of corporate. Back on June 26th, we announced both externally and internally a number of changes to our corporate structure. First, was really decentralizing a lot of what is done at corporate today, and both moving folks to the businesses as well as a number of headcount reductions. I’d say, the second thing is we had historically run a lot of things centrally here at corporate as well, and that is all getting pushed out to the businesses, things like global growth, things like ventures, things like IT and other shared services. So, as you look at that, part of that as well was to announce at least $500 million in incremental cost out over the next two years. And those are auctioned; we’re in the process of really laying out the execution for that right now. And that really starts now and into the second half.
John Flannery
I’d just add, Scott, on that just as a matter of philosophy. I’m deeply committed to philosophy that the corporate center should be significantly smaller and really focused only on governance, on talent, on capital allocation strategy. So, a radical resizing of what it’s been in the past.
Operator
Thank you. Our next question is from Andy Kaplowitz of Citigroup. Please go ahead. 
Andy Kaplowitz
John and Jamie, can you give us some more of an update on GE Capital in a sense that -- you mentioned some smaller impairments in EFS, you give us more color on those, and you said you still expect the GE Capital to be breakeven for the year with the decent ramp up in the second half. Has visibility decreased at all in that our targeted, give your results in 2Q, or do you still see a nice ramp in second half gains to get you there, and I assume no new update in WMC at this point? 

Jamie Miller
Yes. So, on GE Capital, we’re targeting roughly breakeven. That really hasn’t change from our earlier conversations. That could vary based on the timing of asset sales. We do expect fourth quarter tax planning benefits like we had in the past, and assets sale gains. I think, one important thing to note in the first half versus the second half is, as we’ve begun the process of asset sales and we’re doing pricing discovery, we often have to take marks or impairments on specific assets where there may be a loss on sale, but those gains we have to differ until the actual sale happens. And so, that gain portion of it really flushes through in the second half. We will also see lower excess interest cost. You saw we had a number of debt maturities in the first half. So, still targeting roughly breakeven for GE Capital, but again, timing of some of that could vary, and that’s a rough guide. On WMC, I would say, at this point, really not change to what we talked about before.
Operator
Thank you. Our next question is from Jeff Sprague of Vertical Research. Please go ahead. 
Jeff Sprague
Just two quick ones for me; first on the restructuring in 2018. I was wondering how much of the $2.7 billion you would label as actual kind of cost out restructuring relative to write-offs, the GE Healthcare charge and the like. And then the second question, I was just wondering on looking at the Aviation margins -- sequentially, pretty significant drop on sequential spares growth and a little bit of lift in LEAP volumes but not materially. So, just trying to get a better handle on how aviation looks for the year. Jamie, I think you said up 15% in OP. Is that correct and kind of what’s the revenue trajectory associated with that? Thank you.
Jamie Miller
Yes. So, let me start with the restructuring, and I’m going to talk about restructuring, including Baker Hughes GE. So, restructuring for the year at this point, we expect to be about $3.2 billion. That includes about $500 million of Baker Hughes GE. When you really break that down, of that 3.2, we see roughly 2.6 being related to headcount reductions, site closures, other facility exits, things like that. We do have a heavier run rate of what I’ll call BD and transaction-related costs this year. Just as you know, we’ve announced our $20 billion of dispositions. We are working through the other portfolio changes. So, we do see things like carve out audits, transaction fees and other things rolling through there as well. So, that’s that piece of it.
Just shifting to Aviation for a minute. Let me start with -- for the full year, we expect Aviation to have positive margin uplift, and that’s consistent with the 15-plus op margin discussion we’ve had before. But just looking at second quarter in particular, we saw a couple of things here. So, first, sequentially, we had 64 more LEAP engines in second quarter versus first quarter. But if you look at second quarter year-over-year that ramp was really 3 to 4x. So, that was really a significant pull and really impacted margins in the second quarter.
When you start to look at the second half, LEAP continues to come down the cost curve. So, while volume continues to ramp up, we’re seeing a nice benefit continuing in terms of the cost piece of it. On the services side, we are seeing some higher turnaround times in our shops, just given the volume ramp and which is resulting in higher shop costs. We saw some of that in the second quarter. The team is taking very specific action on that. And we expect some of that services pressure to continue in the second half, but not at the same level. Remember, we’ve got a very strong spares rate we’re seeing right now, and we expect that to continue. But bottom line is, when you put all that together, we expect full-year margins to go up. But second quarter definitely has some shifting, especially with that year-over-year comparison in LEAP.

John Flannery
And I’d just add just as a macro comment on the Aviation business overall. This continues to be an extremely strong asset. I think, if you look at markets conditions, they are extremely good in commercial, extremely good in -- freight frankly picking up, good in military. We have a very strong team. The team is working through the LEAP launch well. David went through that at the Farnborough show this week in terms of our delivery schedules and being on track with our delivery schedules that are on track, coming down the cost curve as well on a per unit cost. So, we’ve got I think a good market, a very strong franchise. We continue to clearly outperform on the orders and with customers, and a very strong team running that business with a great execution track record. So, when I step back and look at our portfolio of businesses, this one remains a premium business with a very good and visible long-term outlook.
Operator
Our next question is from Andrew Obin of Bank of America Merrill Lynch. Please go ahead.
Andrew Obin
I guess, I have two questions, one related to Farnborough and other one related to Power, both on services. There was a quote on Bloomberg from one of your colleagues I think, one of your aftermarket folks about some sort of MRO sharing arrangement with Boeing, it was fairly vague, but I’m just trying to understand is that the direction you’re going. And second, if you could just provide more color as to when you guys think transactional business is going to bottom in terms of revenues. Thank you.
John Flannery
I’m not familiar with the comments Andrew on the Boeing MRO strategy. So, that sounds off point to us, but we’ll follow-up with you on that one.
On the transactional services business, I assume you are referring to the Power side of things. And I would just say, it’s a longer cycle process. So, you are dealing essentially with coverage of our installed base and coverage of outages. So, our first step obviously has been trying to drive visibility into our installed base, that’s upto about 90% right now from quite low levels. We’ve got about 80% of those sites with commercial processes and commercial bids being worked on. So, this is something that’s going to unfold over the next several quarters. But, I think the tactical steps upfront around visibility, commercial intensity, sales incentives, the building blocks if you will of something that can unfold over the next several quarters, the team feels good about what they’re doing there. So, it will take some time but it’s an opportunity for us. Margin rates were up I think about 400 basis points on the CM line and transactional. So, we got some work we can do on pricing and product quality and things. But, it will take several quarters I think for this to unfold.
Jamie Miller
And Andrew, I would just add on the transactional piece of it. We did see lower core volume in the quarter with fewer outages. But, the other piece just take into consideration is that upgrades were down close to 50% year-over-year, as well.
Operator
Our next question is from Steve Tusa of JP Morgan. Please go ahead.
Steve Tusa
I just want to thank Matt for all the help over the years. He was extremely diligent with us. So, I really appreciate his help. So, thanks, Matt. So, just two questions. The first one on Aviation just to kind of clarify. And I think you’ve made a lot of comments on the call about third quarter, fourth quarter. Given that seasonality has probably changed a little bit with the new accounting, it’s a little bit unclear how we’re supposed to kind of think about Aviation seasonally. Would you expect it in the third quarter to be down, flat or up relative to the second quarter from a profit perspective at Aviation?
Jamie Miller

Yes. We see the second half with the volume -- sorry, we see strong services continue; we see third quarter being up versus second quarter sequentially.
Steve Tusa
Third quarter being up versus second quarter. Okay, great. And then on the restructuring side, so $2.6 billion is -- how much of that is actual headcount?
Jamie Miller
I don’t have that split with me. We’ll have to follow up with you after that. But of that $2.6 billion, Steve, all of that relates to investment spend we make against headcount reduction, site and facility closure, and other costs out actions.
Operator
Thank you. Our next question is from Nicole DeBlase of Deutsche Bank. Please go ahead.
Nicole DeBlase
So, I guess two questions for you. The first is just a high level question. If you could just kind of comment a little bit on the work you’ve done around potential impact from all of the tariff activity that’s been thrown around over the past few months, and if there is risk to your guidance associated with that? And then, the second thing is just thinking about the Power ramp in the second half of the year. How much of that improvement is underwritten by restructuring actions that have already been taken? I’m just trying to get a sense of the risk if we see further deterioration in the top-line?
John Flannery
Okay, Nicole. Let me take the China tariff situation, and then Jamie can follow up on the Power thing. I think, just on the -- let me give you some context really on our business in China first and then how we see this unfolding.
So, we import about $29 billion of goods globally into the U.S., about 10% of that comes from China. And our business in China, we do about $7 billion, little over $7 billion of revenue in China, and the majority of that is in our Aviation and Healthcare business. If you go and look at the actual tariffs, the $50 billion that are announced and implemented and $200 billion announced but not implemented yet. I would say, we look at it sort of a gross and a net basis. So, it could be $300 million to $400 million at a gross level before any mitigating factors are taken there. And there are some significant mitigating factors. The first is what’s called duty drawbacks. And these are basically credits for any components and things that we would import from China and ultimately reexport as part of the gas turbine, or an MRI machine or an aircraft engine. And that’s a significant amount of what we import. So, we think that could mitigate half or more of what the tariff picture is there. And then obviously over time, we also can adjust our supply chain in response to some of these issues if that’s what made sense.
So, I’d say, we don’t see a major impact yet financially, certainly not on our ‘18 guidance. But that said, we are a company that’s built for fair and open trade that’s obviously a subject of debate and discussion. I think that’s what you’re seeing right now. We’re supportive of a fair and open trade. We have a massively global business in every sense, both customers, supply chains, everything. So, in our view right now as we hope and we expect that ultimately these matters reach a sensible negotiated conclusion, and we think that’s really in the best interest of all parties involved. So, we’re watching this carefully. But, I think the financial parameters of this, we’ve got a good handle on. And then, Jaime, do you want to comment on Power question?
Jamie Miller
Sure. So just looking at Power first half, second half, I think when you start to look at the second half, one thing to keep in mind is that the fourth quarter of 2017, we had $600 million of one-time items with some inventory write-offs and some other things last year. So, you have to think about that in the comparison first. In the second half, we do see lower gas turbine units, year-over-year. Services, as John mentioned, we do expect to start to see that pick up here in the second half, as the results of Scott’s efforts really start to take hold. Cost out, you asked about, we have a $1 billion cost out program in Power this year. For the first half, we’ve seen about 560, $565 million of cost out already. We expect to see at least that same amount in the second half. But fourth quarter is our biggest quarter. We’ve got the volume being lower, the services ramp coming through, the cost out coming through. And one other thing just to remember on volume is that of our gas turbine volume, about 90% of that is already in backlog. And then, just when we look at the aero units for the second half, we have a very strong pipeline there, but that can be a bit lumpy too.

Operator
Our next question is from Julian Mitchell of Barclays. Please go ahead.
Julian Mitchell
So, just a couple of quick questions. One is on the second half free cash flow of about $7.5 billion. Within that portion, how much is really coming from working capital versus the sort of 2 to $2.5 billion outflow in the first half, and I guess how much of that is Power? And then, secondly, you talked a lot about the structural cost out. You had about a $1 billion out or more in the first half firm-wide, but your industrial EBIT is still only flattish year-over-year. So, I guess I’m trying to get a sense of the urgency around the magnitude of stepping up the cost plan, because maybe not that much of it is dropping through to the bottom line.
Jamie Miller
Let me walk you through the second half on the free cash flow and then maybe I’ll touch a little bit on the cost out element, and John may comment as well. So, for the second half on free cash flow, we do see higher earnings across all of the businesses, as we got a very strong volume second half, as you see. With respect to working capital, we see about $3 billion of inventory liquidation coming through in the second half. Really with the shipment profiles we’re seeing across Aviation, Power and Renewables, we continue to expect progress drag at Power but we also expect that to be largely offset by Renewables second half collections as we really start to see that PTC cycle in ‘18, ‘19 and ‘20 ramp.
On contract assets, we had usage in the first half of about $900 million. We expect the usage to be higher in the second half, but lower than the $3 billion usage we had previously planned. So, that’s a little bit there. Just talking about the structural cost piece of it, so $1.1 billion out year-to-date, we still expect the $2 billion plus for the year. When you look at the $1.1 billion and where we’re seeing some shifting in the industrial margin, we are seeing lower volume impacting our margins, primarily at Power that was about $600 million, we’re also seeing mix also affect the margins element, primarily LEAP there, and some FX. So, it is being offset in terms of what you see right now in your operating margins, but again expect the strong half -- the second half as well on both cost control and cost out.
John Flannery
Julian, I’d just say, on the cost side of things, a couple of things here. One is, the cost out initiatives will never end. If we have headwinds in other parts of the business, as Jamie mentioned, that are eating it up, we just have to do more. So, we are looking constantly and aggressively at everything on the cost side of things. So, I think a sense of urgency and our knowledge of the need to execute on that is front and center. I continue to see additional opportunities I think in corporate. We have also gone through with our teams this whole notion of decentralizing corporate, pushing down if you will, or eliminating activity at the corporate level, I expect that’s also happened at the Tier 1 levels in the Power business and the Healthcare business, et cetera. So, I think there’s more to go there. But, this is a self-help execution story for us and the cost is a huge part of that.
Operator
Our last question is from Steven Winoker of UBS. Please go ahead.
Steven Winoker
I’ve got just two quick ones. First one is, I know, you guys give us adjusted EPS guidance of a $1 to $1.07, but I think most companies that we cover, tend to give us a GAAP number as well, especially considering all the moving parts around restructuring and everything else. Is there a way you could give us a sense of what that implies from your perspective on GAAP? And then, the second question is around just pricing and the order book, particularly around wind and on the equipment side and Power.

Jamie Miller
So, let me start with the pricing discussion for a minute. Pricing from a Power perspective, as you see, I mean, the market is very soft right now. We’re expecting a flattish market for the next couple of years on Power and there is a lot of over capacity in the market. As you would expect, we’re seeing continued price pressure on equipment in many markets. I would say on the services side, we’re seeing pricing being relatively stable in transactional services. You saw that come through in the first half with orders and revenue on transactional services up 5%. When you start to look at Renewables, a couple of dynamics here. First, we’re still feeling the effects from the European auction environment. So, pricing does continue to be challenging, but we’re seeing it moderate, and we saw that this quarter. As we move into what should be a very strong volume couple of years, we expect that to help the pricing element as well.
John Flannery
I’d just add on the -- with respect to the adjusted earnings topic in general, that’s something I’d ask Jamie and now Todd as he’s coming in here to look at. I understand your point, and I would say expect an update on that later this year.
Matt Cribbins
Thank you. Just as a reminder, John, before you wrap, replay of today’s call will be available this afternoon on our investor website. 
John Flannery
Great. Thanks a lot, Matt. And I, as Steve noted earlier, do want to thank you really for just the tremendous job in this role. You’ve led us through a lot change and movement in the Company and have always been responsive and service oriented to our investors and analysts. So, thank you for an incredible effort and performance there. And we welcome Todd Ernst as well. So, Todd, the baton is passed to you. We have every expectation you will build on that great work.
So, I would just finish really by saying, this is really the one year anniversary, if you will, for me. And as I reflect back, really much progress has been made at the Company. If I look back, I see obviously -- we’ve spent a lot of time working on a very clear strategic direction, positioning the portfolio so that the businesses can thrive, delevering the Company, decentralizing the management approach. So, strong progress on the strategic direction of the business. Good ongoing progress on our tactical execution items. The $20 billion of disposition, cost out, the team continues execute on the day to day things we need to advance things, and a lot of change. Change at the top of the Company in terms of the leadership team, changes in our Board, changes in the culture of the Company, so a lot has happened in 12 months.
As we stand today and just say we look forward and say, the path is clear. This is really a pivot point for us that this is an execution story going forward. We know what we need to do. We know where we want to go. We know what our strengths are and they are significant. And we know what our issues are, and some of those are significant. So, we’re focused on execution going forward. And I’d say, the team is clear where we’re headed, they know what they need to do, they know where they can contribute, they are excited about the path we’re on. In different pieces of the Company up here, different roles to plays, but there is a confidence in the future. And I’m personally certain we’re on the right path. So, as we said, it’s a multiyear journey, but I’m highly confident in the direction we’re. And it’s up to our team to execute and I’m confident in our ability to do that. So, that said and Matt thanks again for a great performance.
Matt Cribbins
Thank you.
Operator
Thank you. Ladies and gentlemen, this concludes today’s conference. Thank you for participating. You may now disconnect.
Eaton Corp. Plc (NYSE:ETN) Q2 2018 Earnings Call July 31, 2018 10:00 AM ET
Executives
Donald H. Bullock - Eaton Corp. Plc
Craig Arnold - Eaton Corp. Plc
Richard H. Fearon - Eaton Corp. Plc
Analysts
Jeffrey Todd Sprague - Vertical Research Partners LLC
Joe Ritchie - Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC
Scott Reed Davis - Melius Research LLC
Nigel Coe - Wolfe Research LLC
Nicole Deblase - Deutsche Bank Securities, Inc.
Steven Winoker - UBS Securities LLC
Ann P. Duignan - JPMorgan Securities LLC
Jeffrey D. Hammond - KeyBanc Capital Markets, Inc.
Stephen Edward Volkmann - Jefferies LLC
Deane Dray - RBC Capital Markets LLC
Andrew M. Casey - Wells Fargo Securities LLC
Julian Mitchell - Barclays Capital, Inc.
Andrew Burris Obin - Bank of America Merrill Lynch
Mircea Dobre - Robert W. Baird & Co., Inc.
Operator
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for standing by. Welcome to the Eaton Second Quarter Earnings Conference Call. At this time all participants are in a listen-only mode. Later we will conduct a question and answer session. Instructions will be given at that time. As a reminder, this conference is being recorded. I would now like to turn the conference over to our host, Senior Vice President of Investor Relations, Mr. Don Bullock. Please go ahead.
Donald H. Bullock - Eaton Corp. Plc
Good morning. I'm Don Bullock, Eaton's Senior Vice President of Investor Relations. Thank you all for joining us for today for Eaton's Second Quarter 2018 Earnings Call. With me today are Craig Arnold, our Chairman and CEO; and Rick Fearon, our Vice Chairman and Chief Financial and Planning Officer.
Our agenda today includes opening remarks by Craig, highlighting both the performance in the second quarter and our outlook for the remainder of 2018. As we've done historically in our past calls, we'll be taking questions at the end of Craig's comments.
Before we do, I want to remind you of a couple of things. First, the press release from our earnings announcement this morning and the presentation we'll go through today have been posted at our website at www.eaton.com. Please note that the press release and the presentation both include reconciliations to any non-GAAP measures, and a webcast of today's call is going to be accessible on our website and is available for replay for those who aren't able to join us.
Before we get started, I do want to remind you that our comments today will include statements related to expected future results of the company and are therefore forward-looking statements. Actual results can differ materially from those forecasted projections due to a whole range of risk and uncertainties that are described both in the earnings release and our presentation and our related 8-K.
With that behind us, I'll turn it over to Craig to go through our presentation.
Craig Arnold - Eaton Corp. Plc
Okay. Thanks, Don. Appreciate it. Just before we get started with Q2 results, I did want to take an opportunity to once again emphasize the three primary elements of our corporate strategy. I'm sure you've worked through most of the financials already, but first and foremost, we remain focused as a company on delivering organic growth.
Our initiatives are very specific by business, but generally they include investing to create industry-leading products and technologies, leveraging partnerships with distributors and third parties, creating value products and services that allow us to more fully participate across the opportunities we see. So in short, what we're trying to do is find opportunities to say yes more often and doing it in a way that solves customer problems but also delivers attractive returns.
Second, we continue to expand our margins by improving productivity in our factories and in our functions and by selectively undertaking restructuring initiatives that allow us to eliminate redundancies, eliminate waste and really being more selective on how we spend our time moving away from marginal activities, but just as importantly, doubling down on those areas where we have the right to win with attractive returns.

Third, we'll maintain our disciplined approach to capital allocation which begins with investing to win in all of our existing businesses. We'll also consistently return cash to shareholders in the form of industry-leading dividends, share repurchases, and by maintaining our rigor as we evaluate M&A opportunities against our hurdle rate.
We think by continuously delivering on these components, we'll generate superior value for our shareholders both in the short-term and the long-term. And in the context of that kind of strategic overview, we also thought we'd take an opportunity to just highlight once again this quarter a number of places where we've made a bit of progress against these strategic initiatives.
And on page four, I've highlighted a few of the examples. First, in our efforts to grow, I point to our presence in the fast-growing data center market which continues to pay off. In fact, we booked record orders in the first half of the year. We're seeing strong global demand for new facilities in hyperscale and Internet 2.0 applications, and importantly, we're winning in this space.
We also entered into a new joint venture with Shaanxi Fast Gear for light duty transmissions to serve the Chinese market. The JV combines Eaton's broad transmission technology with the leading transmission company in China and allows us to participate in the world's largest light vehicle market.
We also made solid progress on our digitization initiatives, and while too many to note, I would point out a few examples of progress made in the quarter. We launched an IoT enabled home lighting solution. We deployed an IoT enabled hydraulic system in sugar cane harvest applications as well as in hydraulic fracturing. We formed an industry cybersecurity partnership with the Rochester Institute of Technology which allows us to advance the common and secure IoT platform that we intend to deploy on all of our products. And so really solid progress as we continue to digitize the company and focus on opportunities to grow with these new technologies.
And while just getting started, we did secure our first high voltage converter order in our newly formed eMobility segment. And lastly, we added significant capacity to our hydraulics hose business enabling us to sharply reduce lead times and expand our presence in the high volume segment of the market.
So while not a complete list, these are examples that hopefully provide you with a sense of how we're moving our strategic priorities forward and how we're also investing in the future.
Now turning to our financial results for Q2 on page five, I'll just add some context to what you've already seen in the results. First of all, we think a very strong quarter of performance by our businesses. Earnings at $1.39, up 21% over Q2 of 2017 and at the high end of our guidance range. Our performance was driven by both strong revenue and record margins. Organic revenue up 7% was actually the highest reported growth since Q4 2011. FX added 1% offset by 1% in divestitures.
Bookings accelerated in most segments, but especially in Electrical Systems & Services and Aerospace, which were both up solid double digit. We generated all-time record segment margins of 17% based upon strong volume growth and strong incrementals, and we think once again demonstrated the ongoing benefits of our multiyear restructuring program and how those benefits are coming true.
Operating cash flow was $499 million in the quarter, and while not as strong as you might have expected, cash was impacted by adding working capital to support increased growth as well as by selectively pre-buying inventory to mitigate impacts of the trade tariffs.
And finally, we repurchased $300 million of our shares in the quarter bringing year to date purchases to $600 million, 1.7% of shares outstanding at the start of the year. So we think really strong, balanced performance across the company.

Turning to page six, we'll provide a summary of the consolidated results for the quarter, and here I just highlight a couple of elements of the income statement. We talked about the sales increase which really allowed us to increase segment operating margins by 16% and net income by 18%, earnings per share up 21% in Q2, and this compares to 15% in Q1. And lastly, we did deliver 11.1% after-tax margins in the quarter.
Moving to the segments, I'll start with Electrical Products. Our revenues were up 4%, 3% coming from organic growth, and this is up from the 1% growth we reported in Q1.
In the quarter, we saw particular revenue strength in industrial markets, especially in the Americas and the EMEA market, Europe, Middle East and Africa. Total bookings were up 4% in the quarter, and excluding Lighting, bookings were actually up 7%, which is a step up from Q1 bookings where, also excluding Lighting, they increased 2%. So this business is also ramping favorably.
Order strength was broad, driven by both industrial and residential markets. I would also note that lighting markets appear to have stabilized, and we expect to see low single digit market growth in the second half of the year.
Importantly, our margins in the quarter were up 120 basis points to 18.5%, which is a second quarter record. So strong conversion in our Electrical Products business.
Next, the results for our Electrical Systems & Service business is on page eight. Revenues increased a solid 7% in the quarter, and this is up from the 2% growth that we saw in Q1. Foreign exchange added 1% which was offset by negative 1% from a small divestiture in a joint venture.
In the quarter, we saw revenue strength in industrial projects, in data centers, and solid growth in harsh and hazardous markets. We generate very strong bookings growth of 15% with strength in the Americas and Asia Pacific and bookings were especially strong in large industrial projects and in data centers. And our backlog continued to grow increasing 14% in the quarter, and we think position the business well for continued growth in the second half of 2018 and certainly into 2019 as well.
Operating margins were 15%, up 130 basis points, and we delivered strong leverage as the 7% sales increase resulted in a 17% increase in operating profits.
Moving to page nine, here we cover the Hydraulics results. Sales increased 14% in the quarter, 13% organic, 1% positive FX. Revenues were strong with both mobile OEMs and across the distribution channel. Bookings were actually down 1% in the quarter, and this does take a little bit of an explanation, but this included Asia Pacific up 15%, the Americas up 4%, offset by EMEA down 21%. And while impacting orders, the lower EMEA number is actually the result of our operational improvements and capacity investments that we've made to shorten delivery lead times, and this has reduced naturally our customers' need to place long-dated orders And certainly when we take a look at our backlog, it increased some 26% year to date and this certainly gives us confidence that this market remains strong.
Margins at 14% were up 230 basis points, so we continue to see the benefits of restructuring efforts here as well as leverage from the higher volume. However, I would note as we discussed on prior calls, we continue to experience challenges as we ramp up production to support the strong growth levels and most of the challenges are coming from the supply base which has really struggled to keep pace with the higher demand.
Next, our Aerospace business is listed on page 10. Sales were up 6%, all organic. The sales growth was driven by strong activity in military OE across all segments, biz jets and commercial aftermarket. Orders were even stronger, up 18%, with strength in both military and commercial aftermarket, business jet, military fighters and military rotorcraft. Our backlog also remains strong and is up 13% over prior year. And lastly, operating margins were once again very strong, 19.4% and up 90 basis points over prior year.

Turning to page 11, our Vehicle business had another strong quarter. Sales increased 6%. Organic revenues were actually up 11% and the divestiture impact of the joint venture that we formed with Cummins was a negative 5%.
NAFTA heavy duty truck production was up 15% in Q2 following more than 40% in Q1. So this market continues to be very strong. We continue to expect NAFTA heavy duty truck production to be at 295,000 units for 2018 which implies a modest growth in the second half of the year on more difficult comps.
And I'd also note that the industry is seeing a few supplier challenges that will likely limit second half production but pushing production into 2019. And in the automotive markets, both Europe and China are stronger than we originally anticipated and the U.S. market is really coming in about on expectations. So really broad strength in our Vehicle business.
I'd also note that the Eaton Cummins joint venture is doing well. Revenues grew to $141 million in the quarter, so very strong growth in our joint venture. And margins were at 18.5%, up 180 basis points from prior year on strong revenue.
And finally, results in our eMobility segment are shown on slide 12. Sales in the quarter were up 15%, 14% organic, and having just formed the business in Q1, we're pleased to announce that we have in fact won our first high voltage converter order, one of the key products that we've just begun selling into the electrical vehicle market. And our pipeline of opportunities perhaps more importantly is 2X what it was in Q1, so we continue to see tremendous growth in the opportunities that we're having an opportunity to quote on for customers.
Margins were 16.9%, down 120 basis points reflecting really the additional R&D investment but very much in line with our expectations.
On page 13, we've updated our organic growth outlook for 2018. Our end markets continue to grow above our original expectations in a number of our businesses and so we're increasing our full-year organic growth estimate from 5% to 6%. The continued strength in orders from Electrical Systems & Services has led to an acceleration of organic growth and we're now forecasting growth of 6%. We're also increasing the organic growth outlook for our Aerospace business to 6% on strength in both military and commercial markets. And finally, our Vehicle business continues to perform at a high level and we're increasing our organic growth guidance to 6% for the full year as well. You'll also recall that we increased our Vehicle segment organic growth estimate following a strong Q1 as well.
Overall, a 1% change for Eaton and this is on top of the 1% increase that we provided as a part of our Q1 guidance.
Moving to page 14, we'd like to provide just a bit of perspective on where we think our businesses are in the economic cycle and why we think conditions are setting up well for the second half 2018 and really going into 2019.
Now, as this chart demonstrates, we think that our end markets are currently – where our end markets are currently at in terms of the economic cycle. As you can see, most of our end markets are in the early to mid-growth stage, which we think bodes well for continued market growth. The majority of Eaton's revenue comes from businesses that are in the early to mid part of the growth cycle, and this includes many of our larger businesses like long-cycle Electrical Systems & Services segment.
So overall, we think our businesses will continue to have a market tailwind for some time to come, and we would expect to, as well, grow faster than our end markets.
On page 15, we provide an update on our thoughts regarding raw material inflation as well as the estimated impact from tariffs.
As we communicated at the beginning of the year, we continue to execute on our strategy of offsetting raw material and logistics cost inflation with price and cost out actions. We moved quickly with pricing actions in the first half of 2018, and as a result, we expect no negative EPS impact in 2018 from additional commodity inflation.

With regard to tariffs, we think there will be a very modest cost impact for our businesses overall, some $65 million. But we also fully expect to mitigate this increase through actions that are currently underway or will shortly be implemented in our businesses.
So I won't go through the tariff details in a lot of detail, but I would emphasize kind of the two main points. And one, our long-term strategy has been and continues to be to manufacture in the same zone in which we sell, and this certainly reduces the tariff impact on Eaton. And secondly, we're committed to move swiftly to take pricing actions to offset any tariff impact that we do see in our businesses.
Moving to margin guidance on slide 16, we're increasing margins for three of our segments where we're seeing stronger than expected organic growth and solid performance. These include Electrical Systems & Services, up 20 basis points; Aerospace, up 30 basis points; and Vehicle up 50 basis points. We are lowering our guidance for Hydraulics to a range of 13.7% to 14.3%, which is a 50 basis points reduction at the midpoint. This is in response to supply chain challenges and inefficiencies as volume continues to grow at these strong paces. And our full-year margin guidance remains in the range of 16.4% to 17% and really places us on a solid trajectory to achieve our 17% to 18% margin targets that we set for 2020.
And finally on page 17, we provide a summary of our Q3 and 2018 guidance. For Q3, we expect EPS of between $1.35 and $1.45, and this assumes 7% organic growth. We expect margins to be 16.9% to 17.3%, and a tax rate of 13% to 14%.
For the full year 2018, we are again increasing our full-year EPS guidance to a range of $5.20 to $5.40, which is a 10% increase at the midpoint. Organic revenue growth is now expected to be up 6% versus 5% previously. Foreign exchange is now expected to be only a $50 million positive which is down from the $200 million that we had in our prior estimate.
Segment margins will be in the 16.4% to 17%, as earlier noted. No change in our cash flow or free cash flow guidance, and corporate expenses, tax rate, CapEx share repurchase assumptions all remain unchanged from prior guidance.
So just before I hand it back to Don, I did want to once again take this opportunity to summarize why we think Eaton is an attractive investment opportunity. As you can see, and we talked about, our markets have returned to growth. The next few years will be much better than the last few.
In addition, we have a number of really attractive organic growth initiatives that we think will allow us to continue to grow faster than our end markets. And our restructuring is paying off. Our 2018 margins will be at an all-time high, and we have plenty of room to continue to improve them. Our balance sheet is in great shape. Net debt-to-capital is at 30%, and our pension plan is now 96% funded. Our cash flow continues to be strong, and we expect to consistently deliver free cash flow at or above 100% of net income while generating some $8 billion of free cash flow over the next three years.
We're also returning cash to shareholders through a high dividend yield, 3.3% today, and buying back shares 1% to 2% on an ongoing basis. And lastly, as we committed, we'll deliver 11% to 12% EPS growth over the next three years, and so we think once again solid performance this quarter, a positive outlook, and we think a really compelling story for investing in Eaton.
So with that, I'll stop and turn it back to Don for Q&A.
Donald H. Bullock - Eaton Corp. Plc
Okay. Our operator's going to provide guidance on participating in the Q&A.
Question-and-Answer Session
Operator
Thank you.
Donald H. Bullock - Eaton Corp. Plc
Before we jump into the Q&A, we do see we have a number of people on the call and we also have a number of calls going on simultaneously to this time so I want to be very sensitive to the timing of that. So if we would please limit yourself to a call and a follow-up call. And with that, our first question comes – question and follow-up question, excuse me. And our first question comes from Jeff Sprague with Vertical Research.

Jeffrey Todd Sprague - Vertical Research Partners LLC
Thank you. Good morning.
Richard H. Fearon - Eaton Corp. Plc
Hi.
Jeffrey Todd Sprague - Vertical Research Partners LLC
Hey. Great momentum. I think one interesting question given that you guys report a little later than others is what you're seeing in July. I'd say it's somewhat implicit in your Q3 guidance obviously, but was there some element of pre-buying or other activity in June as people were looking at tariffs? And did you see any let-up in July?
Craig Arnold - Eaton Corp. Plc
Yeah, I think the short answer to the question, Jeff, is no. We really did not see any pre-buy of any measure, and what we've seen to date in July is very much consistent with the patterns that we've been seeing. So absolutely everything that we've forecasted in the outlook for the company is very much consistent with the way the businesses have been performing.
Jeffrey Todd Sprague - Vertical Research Partners LLC
Right. And then just to be clear on price-cost, what you're saying is kind of underlying price-cost, you're caught up or have visibility on being caught up but there's still actions that need to be taken on tariffs? Can you clarify that?
Craig Arnold - Eaton Corp. Plc
There's still a fair amount of uncertainty as it relates to the implementation of 301. And so what I would tell you is what we know about to date and what has been announced to date we have very much either announced or implemented plans to offset that impact.
There's a lot of uncertainty as you think about the step 2, step 3 of 301 and what actually happens that obviously we don't have visibility into, and those actions, if they are implemented as speculated, then we would have to take additional actions down the road. But everything that we've seen to date and everything that's been announced to date is very much already baked into our guidance and plans are very much already implemented or in the phase of being implemented.
Jeffrey Todd Sprague - Vertical Research Partners LLC
Thanks. I'll hold it to two and pass the baton.
Donald H. Bullock - Eaton Corp. Plc
Okay. Thank you. Our next question comes from Joe Ritchie of Goldman Sachs.
Joe Ritchie - Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC
Thanks. Good morning, everyone.
Richard H. Fearon - Eaton Corp. Plc
Hi.
Craig Arnold - Eaton Corp. Plc
Morning.
Joe Ritchie - Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC
So organic bookings in ESS, obviously really good to see the progress that you're seeing there and finally seeing some of that growth materialize. Craig, my first question is maybe touch on what you're seeing from like a leading indicator perspective on the data center stuff, the industrial projects, and how you feel about that business on the go forward.
Craig Arnold - Eaton Corp. Plc
Yeah, and I appreciate your question. Certainly the few big businesses that are inside of Electrical Systems & Services would include our power distribution and controls assemblies, our commercial distribution assemblies our power quality business and also Crouse-Hinds. And I'd say in all four of those very large businesses, we are seeing very strong order growth across the business.
And so all four of those businesses are performing well. We talked about the fact that the backlog is up from 15%, and we saw strong orders, and those are the four businesses that are essentially driving the growth. And so very much as we anticipated for our Electrical Systems & Services business, perhaps even a little ahead of schedule, those businesses are late cycle businesses but are ramping right now and we expect to continue to perform for some time to come.
Joe Ritchie - Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC
Okay. That's great to hear. And then my second question maybe following up on Jeff's trade tariff question and more broadly on cost inflation. When you think about the different segments and your ability to offset cost inflation across the segments, where are you finding it the easiest or are you finding it difficult in some of your segments? Basically a question around pricing power and your ability to offset.

Craig Arnold - Eaton Corp. Plc
Sure. Again, and I'd say it's pretty much no different this cycle than it is any cycle. And to the extent that we're selling through distribution, distribution always tends to be a little easier. Price increases are good for our distributors, and they have the ability to pass it forward into the marketplace relatively easier.
It's always more challenging with the big OEMs, but I would tell you that our plan's to pass it forward every place including in those places that have historically been a little bit more challenging. But I just think more generally speaking, distribution tends to be a bit easier than large OEMs, but we're not differentiating between the two. We're passing price increases equally through to all of our customers.
Joe Ritchie - Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC
Okay. Thank you. I'll pass it on.
Donald H. Bullock - Eaton Corp. Plc
Our next question comes from Scott Davis with Melius Research.
Scott Reed Davis - Melius Research LLC
Hey. Good morning, guys.
Richard H. Fearon - Eaton Corp. Plc
Hi.
Craig Arnold - Eaton Corp. Plc
Morning.
Scott Reed Davis - Melius Research LLC
The positive benefit of putting up these kind of numbers is you're kicking off a lot of cash. And we've seen some of your peers have a fairly active M&A pipeline and some direct comp, some not. But what do you think as far as priorities are concerned? With the amount of cash you're kicking off, it almost doesn't feel like buybacks can really keep up to the – can almost not keep up to the growth. But is M&A something that think will come back this year?
Craig Arnold - Eaton Corp. Plc
As we've stated in prior quarters, having paid down the last tranche of debt associated with the Cooper acquisition, the company is certainly in a position today both from an organizational capacity standpoint and from a cash standpoint that we have the ability today to re-enter the M&A market.
And today I can tell you that we are looking at more opportunities than we have in quite some time. But having said that, we'll be disciplined as we think about how we value and price these transactions. We talk about a cost of capital of being 8% to 9% and saying we want a minimum of 300 basis points over our cost of capital. So we intend to be disciplined as we look at these opportunities.
But having said that, we will not allow cash to build up on the balance sheet. To the extent that we're not able to land acquisitions, which we would hope to do, we'll certainly look for other ways of returning cash to shareholders.
Scott Reed Davis - Melius Research LLC
Fair enough. And then as a follow-up, in the Lighting business, you mentioned a return to growth in the back half of the year. Is that – is there also a sense of price stability that you're finally seeing in that market explicitly?
Craig Arnold - Eaton Corp. Plc
Yeah, I would say that as we talk about our own Lighting business and our own strategy with respect to Lighting is that we have made a decision to be perhaps more selective than others around business that we're chasing, and we made some adjustments in terms of where we focus our efforts. And I can tell you that as we think about the segments of the markets where we think are attractive and the places that we want to play, you generally see better pricing power, better pricing stability.
I can't say if you think about the entire market at the low end of the market that that dynamic has changed dramatically. But the places that we anticipate playing and the places where we think we have an opportunity to sell differentiated value-added solutions, we do have a lot better pricing power in those markets.
Scott Reed Davis - Melius Research LLC
Okay. Sounds good. Thank you, guys. Good luck.
Donald H. Bullock - Eaton Corp. Plc

Our next question comes from Nigel Coe with Wolfe.
Nigel Coe - Wolfe Research LLC
Thanks. Good morning, guys.
Richard H. Fearon - Eaton Corp. Plc
Hi.
Nigel Coe - Wolfe Research LLC
So you called out data center as a strong end market, which shouldn't be a huge surprise, but I think it's the first time you've really specifically called data center end market strength.
So I'm wondering is this pretty broad across geographies, or is it one of two super-sized data centers that you're starting to see coming through?
And then just thinking about the ESS margins and we're starting to tilt now towards larger projects. Do you think that mix becomes a headwind as we go into the second half of the year, maybe 2019?
Craig Arnold - Eaton Corp. Plc
Yeah, I'd say to your first question around data centers and to your point, Nigel, it's one of the big secular trends that we certainly think bodes well for Eaton and will help generate long-term growth for our company. And it is broad. We're seeing growth in the data center markets really around the world, and as you move to hyperscale and colos and as the world just generates more and more data, we think that trend will continue for some time and will continue broadly.
To your other question around margins, no, we don't anticipate that margins will be under pressure in this business, and I'd say quite frankly today if we take a look at where the industry sits today in electrical assemblies, for the most part, we have capacity constraints. Some of the demand that we're seeing today in our business is really pressing us and others to really deal with a lot of volume that we're looking at, and we're certainly looking at potentially adding capacity to deal with some of this increased demand.
And so, no, I don't anticipate at all that margins will come under pressure and given the balance of capacity and demand, I think the market's in a great position today to actually get price.
Nigel Coe - Wolfe Research LLC
Great. Thanks. And a quick follow-on.
Richard H. Fearon - Eaton Corp. Plc
I just wanted to add one thing. We've seen a bigger – a larger proportion of complex large industrial type projects, and those tend to have higher margins. Inherently there are fewer people that can actually pursue projects of that nature. So that's another element to the margin outlook.
Nigel Coe - Wolfe Research LLC
Great. Thank you. And then quickly on the EP, it looked like Lighting was down roughly 10% in the quarter. Maybe you can clarify that. But what was the impact on operating leverage. You obviously had very strong margins for EP, but if we look at ex Lighting margins how did that look?
Craig Arnold - Eaton Corp. Plc
Yeah, I'm not sure of your math, but we know Lighting was down closer to 4% in the quarter, not 10%. But I'd say that today I could just tell you that it's better. I mean, we've not given specific margin numbers for our Lighting business, and I would just tell you that the margins in Lighting are certainly below, well below the average for the Electrical Products segment.
And so they certainly have a negative impact on the overall margins for the segment. But inside of that, we have a fairly large Lighting business and still posted 18.5% margins in Electrical Products which I think is a real testament to the strength of the franchise.
Nigel Coe - Wolfe Research LLC
Great. Thank you.
Donald H. Bullock - Eaton Corp. Plc
Our next question comes from Nicole DeBlase with the Deutsche Bank.
Nicole Deblase - Deutsche Bank Securities, Inc.
Thanks. Good morning, guys.
Richard H. Fearon - Eaton Corp. Plc
Hi.
Nicole Deblase - Deutsche Bank Securities, Inc.
So I guess I want to start on ESS. If we look back into history since the Cooper acquisition, we've never really seen a real ESS recovery. So I guess if you could give us an idea of how order growth translates to revenue growth. Because it seems to me from the past three quarters that an acceleration in revenue growth could be in the cards.

Craig Arnold - Eaton Corp. Plc
Yeah, no, that would be our expectation as well, and if you think about it today, what's in the backlog – typically I'd say what's in the backlog, most of that becomes consumed within the next 12 to 15 months, probably 75% to 80% of it.
And so it is a longer lead time business from project to delivery, but it's not two years out or 18 months out. It's much nearer term than that. And so we do anticipate that the strong orders that we're seeing in our Electrical Systems & Services business convert in a relatively short period of time into higher revenue growth.
Nicole Deblase - Deutsche Bank Securities, Inc.
Okay. Got it. Thanks, Craig. That's helpful. And maybe just one on Aerospace. Orders were also really, really strong there this quarter. I know that's a business that tends to see a lot of lumpiness. So if you could just frame the strength a little bit, where the growth was the strongest, and what your expectations are for the next several quarters.
Craig Arnold - Eaton Corp. Plc
Yeah, I appreciate your comment too. It is a place where orders tend to be a bit lumpy. But we really did see, I'd say, in this quarter with respect to orders, pretty broad strength. A lot of that came out of military markets. Certainly pretty broad across all segments of military, and so you're seeing some of the increase in the U.S. federal spending come through in fleet readiness and dealing with some of the historical underspending perhaps in our military.
But also we saw very strong strength in aftermarket. Both military and commercial aftermarket were both up strongly, and that's revenue passenger kilometers, people keep getting on planes flying and that's translating into higher aftermarket growth as well.
So I'd say it's been a fairly broad-based strength. The one place you'd look at the biggest segment which is commercial transport, you have very strong numbers being posted by Boeing, Airbus a little less so, but we think Boeing – if Airbus, excuse me, delivers their second half of the year, there's probably more strength there as well.
And, so we think it's a pretty broad-based increase in our Aerospace business, and as you know, these big commercial OEs are sitting on record backlogs that are growing every day. So it was a very successful Paris Air Show where both companies booked very strong orders, and so we really think the aerospace industry is really set up for growth for an extended period of time.
Nicole Deblase - Deutsche Bank Securities, Inc.
Thanks, Craig.
Donald H. Bullock - Eaton Corp. Plc
Our next question comes from Steven Winoker with UBS.
Steven Winoker - UBS Securities LLC
Hey, thanks. Good morning, all.
Richard H. Fearon - Eaton Corp. Plc
Hi.
Craig Arnold - Eaton Corp. Plc
Morning.
Steven Winoker - UBS Securities LLC
Hey, so I just wanted to go back to Scott's question on the M&A front. Craig, you talked about kind of the usual 8% to 9% cost of capital plus 300 basis points over that that you're looking for. Just what kind of timeframe are you thinking about that you want to achieve those things? Given the step-up in M&A activity across a lot of your segments, I'm just trying to get a sense for the kind of competitive positioning that you have there.
Richard H. Fearon - Eaton Corp. Plc
Typically if you look at how our past acquisitions have done, we typically start a little bit below that 300 basis points over the cost of capital, but then we end up by year three or so at the cost of capital and then above that as you get past year three. So that's as you work the synergies into the equation.
Steven Winoker - UBS Securities LLC
But your discipline commentary means that you're not willing to see that stretch out these days because I think we are seeing that stretch out for a lot of M&A.

Richard H. Fearon - Eaton Corp. Plc
Well, we are – we have always said we're cash on cash buyers. We look at the cash we put out and the cash that comes in, and the time value of money makes a difference. And so all of that goes into our thinking, and I think what Craig was trying to communicate is we will remain disciplined. If we believe there are significant synergies that are truly actuable, then that'll factor into our numbers. But we also, with all the experience we've had, we know that it sometimes takes longer than you think to generate them.
Steven Winoker - UBS Securities LLC
Okay.
Craig Arnold - Eaton Corp. Plc
And it's always a matter of what the alternatives are as well. So we'll always look at as we think about discretionary cash, and the acquisitions will compete like everything else against other options for other investments that have also very strong returns. And I'd say we have a number of, whether it's organic growth or other ways of improving the effectiveness of the business, we have plenty of other opportunities we think to deploy cash in value creating ways.
Steven Winoker - UBS Securities LLC
Okay. And Craig, can you just comment a little more on that Hydraulics order rate in EMEA? I know it's capacity investment to reduce lead time such, but between that and some of the other supply based commentary, just wanted to get a sense of the organization's ability to keep up with demand across your network.
Craig Arnold - Eaton Corp. Plc
Yeah, and I would say we are in fact seeing improvement. So we don't want to overplay that. We're seeing improvement in our ability; we're seeing improvement in the supply base. But having said that, it's come slower than what we anticipated.
With respect to the orders in Europe, and what we do is when we take a look at our orders internally, we take a look at when orders are due, and we look at things due within the next three months, due within the next six months, due within the next six to 12 months. And what we've seen in Europe specifically is a significant reduction in orders that are basically the long lead-time orders. And we think while it doesn't show up favorably on our orders chart, that's really a confirmation and a testament to the fact that we're getting better operationally in delivering. We've made big investments in new capacity, and so our customers today are actually placing orders that are more close to what the real demand is.
Richard H. Fearon - Eaton Corp. Plc
And if I could just add a couple of nuances to that. If you look in Europe, orders that we had in the second quarter due within three months, were actually up. Orders due past three months were down more than 50%. So we believe that that's because you no longer have to put these capacity reserving orders in. We simply have capacity. And we've added more than 10% capacity in our very large conveyance facility in Europe.
Steven Winoker - UBS Securities LLC
All right. Makes a lot of sense.
Craig Arnold - Eaton Corp. Plc
And we think the end markets continue to be strong. You obviously have seen a number of the companies in this space report, and at this point we think those markets continue to perform very well, and the underlying demand we think is still very strong.
Steven Winoker - UBS Securities LLC
Makes sense. Thanks. Good luck.
Donald H. Bullock - Eaton Corp. Plc
Our next question comes from Ann Duignan with JPMorgan.
Ann P. Duignan - JPMorgan Securities LLC
Yes. Good morning. Because we've had multiple companies reporting this morning, I'm going to ask you a simple math question. You've taken up your organic growth outlook, but you've maintained your margin guidance. So what is your revised incremental profit outlook versus the 40% you had guided to?
Craig Arnold - Eaton Corp. Plc

The way I would think about really kind of maintaining the margin range is that we provide a range because essentially it gives us a fair amount of ability to move within that. And so I would not read or overread much into the fact that we haven't changed the range. Certainly our expectations are to be within that range and certainly the midpoint can move one way or another depending upon what your assumptions are.
So I would say with respect to the fact that we didn't change the margin guidance, I would not overread that. There is in fact a fair amount of uncertainty around the second half of the year, and I think more than anything, the fact that we didn't move that is a reflection of the uncertainty that we see in the marketplace with respect to trade and other variables that it's really difficult to predict and control which way it's going to head.
Ann P. Duignan - JPMorgan Securities LLC
Okay. But you were confident enough given your backlog in your orders to raise the organic growth outlook. Is that the way we should read that?
Craig Arnold - Eaton Corp. Plc
Exactly. It's exactly right. The backlog, as we talked about in a number of our businesses, whether it's Aerospace or Hydraulics or Electrical Systems & Services, the ones that build big backlogs continue to ramp, and so we think the backlog certainly provides a lot of confidence in our ability to continue to grow.
Ann P. Duignan - JPMorgan Securities LLC
Okay. And just a quick follow-up. Just on your early-stage growth, mid-stage, and late-stage, I wonder if you could give us more color on why you think that U.S. not-residential construction is only in mid stage. I mean, we've been expanding for eight years. It certainly feels like we're not going to fall off a cliff in the near term, but it certainly feels like we're in the later stages of expansion in U.S. non-residential construction. So if you could clarify that, I'd appreciate it.
Richard H. Fearon - Eaton Corp. Plc
I guess I'd cite three things, Ann. First of all the expansion we've seen in non-resi thus far in this cycle has been quite modest, much more modest than you typically see in expansion cycles. So that's point one.
Point two, if you look at this growth in oil and gas spending, typically oil and gas spending flows into a variety of non-residential categories, and we think that you will see that occur again this time just as you've seen in the past sometimes it'd flow downward when oil and gas activity goes down. But now we're, in our view, pretty clearly in an up cycle in the oil and gas markets.
And then thirdly if you look at more minutely at the Dodge contract data, it is signaling that you are going to see acceleration as you get to the back half of this year and into 2019. And so those are the three elements that give us confidence that you're going to see some pretty good conditions in non-residential construction.
Ann P. Duignan - JPMorgan Securities LLC
And any of the subsegments within non-residential you'd expect more acceleration or less acceleration? And I'll leave it there. Thank you.
Richard H. Fearon - Eaton Corp. Plc
I think you're going to see more acceleration in what I would call the heavier, the industrial, the oil and gas related type activities. Obviously you're also seeing it in things like data centers.
Ann P. Duignan - JPMorgan Securities LLC
Okay. I appreciate it. Thank you.
Donald H. Bullock - Eaton Corp. Plc
Our next question comes from Jeff Hammond with KeyBanc.
Jeffrey D. Hammond - KeyBanc Capital Markets, Inc.
Hey. Good morning, guys.
Richard H. Fearon - Eaton Corp. Plc
Hi.
Craig Arnold - Eaton Corp. Plc
Morning, Jeff.
Jeffrey D. Hammond - KeyBanc Capital Markets, Inc.
Hey. So a lot of discussion on supply chain. It seems like you've kind of alleviated some bottlenecks in Hydraulics yourselves. Just maybe talk about any signs of supply chain improving within Hydraulics and truck as we move through, and then conversely, any other businesses where you see it becoming a bigger problem. Thanks.

Craig Arnold - Eaton Corp. Plc
I'd say that we are in fact seeing signs of improvement both in Hydraulics and in truck. And you've obviously, Jeff, have heard what others in the space have said around some of these specific bottlenecks in truck and how those things are finding a way of working theirselves through.
But I'd say typically in a lot of these industries, you could be six months away from, in the worst case from a demand signal that says something is changing to the ability to flow all that demand back to the supply chain base. And so we obviously have seen both of these markets really ramping over the last 18 months, and we have been chasing it for 18 months. But I think today, we're on top of it and we have a much better sense for where these markets are going.
So in simple terms, I'd say we have seen signs of improvement everyplace. We are getting better. Our suppliers are getting better. We're doing a much better job of shortening lead times, and we talked about that a little bit in our Hydraulics business in Europe which is giving our customers confidence.
But at this point I'd say that we certainly – it took us longer to get here than we'd hoped, and that's why we're experiencing some of these inefficiencies. So I'd say overall I think things should be better going forward.
Jeffrey D. Hammond - KeyBanc Capital Markets, Inc.
Okay. And then just in EPG, it seems like Lighting has been clouding the growth rates for some time, and think your pointing to a little bit of growth in the second half. Just looking at the other businesses, is there opportunity to see some growth acceleration in EPG just as the Lighting comps get easier? Thanks.
Craig Arnold - Eaton Corp. Plc
Yeah. I think the Lighting comps get easier and I think our own business in Lighting actually has a better second half of the year. You saw the acceleration in EPG when you compare Q1 to Q2, and we would anticipate as you go into the back half of the year, that Lighting performs, relatively speaking, better. Somebody said easier comps, but the business, underlying business performs better and as a result, EPG performs better.
Richard H. Fearon - Eaton Corp. Plc
And remember, Jeff, you still have a fair number, a fair amount of industrial components in EPG in the Products segment and in those parts of that business are going to benefit of course by growth in the commercial and industrial assembly businesses as well as just oil and gas activity.
Jeffrey D. Hammond - KeyBanc Capital Markets, Inc.
Okay. Thanks, guys.
Donald H. Bullock - Eaton Corp. Plc
Our next question comes from Steve Volkmann with Jefferies.
Stephen Edward Volkmann - Jefferies LLC
Hey, good morning. Thanks for taking my question. Couple of quick follow-ups. It feels to me like you guys actually ought to have pretty good visibility into 2019 when you look at some of this data center stuff we've talked about, ESS orders, Aerospace, some of the truck stuff that got pushed out. Can you just give us a sense of how you're feeling about your visibility into 2019 relative to, say, a year ago?
Craig Arnold - Eaton Corp. Plc
Well, I mean, certainly much better than a year ago. And as you've noted, a lot of the long cycle businesses that we anticipated to turn positive have turned positive. And so we certainly feel much better about our visibility into 2019 today than we did even three months ago.
But having said that, in terms of guidance specifically for 2019, we think our markets grow. And we don't think that we're at the top of the cycle in many of our businesses. There's certainly a few extraordinary events in 2018 that are pushing markets up, but we think when you look at in terms of a long-term trend, we think many of our businesses, as we talked about in the context of where they are in the cycle, are either at the early point or the middle part of the cycle. And we continue to see growth into 2019.

Stephen Edward Volkmann - Jefferies LLC
Okay. Thanks. And then just to go back on Lighting for a second, it's nice to see that sort of stabilizing. But as you mentioned, it still sort of mixes your margin down. And I'm just curious if you've changed the way you think about Lighting as kind of a core business of Eaton going forward and is there any chance to perhaps find another way to kind of deal with that going forward.
Craig Arnold - Eaton Corp. Plc
Yeah, we're focusing on winning in the marketplace. We have made a slight adjustment to our strategy for Lighting in terms of how we think about kind of some of the more commoditized piece of the space, but other than that, no change at all in our strategy with respect to Lighting.
We think it's got a lot of great underlying technology. It is very complementary with what we do in the rest of our Electrical business, and so no change in strategic direction.
Stephen Edward Volkmann - Jefferies LLC
And do you have a way to improve margins going forward?
Craig Arnold - Eaton Corp. Plc
Yeah. Part of the things that we're doing to improve margins is, as we talked about, where we focus and how we decide to participate or not in some of the more commoditized parts of the business. So there is that element of it. In our Lighting business, no different than the rest of our organization, we have undertaken a number of restructuring initiatives to get at some fixed costs and structural costs, and we'll continue to invest in the high end of Lighting in the area of controls and connected Lighting, and that segment of the market tends to have more attractive margins.
Stephen Edward Volkmann - Jefferies LLC
Great. Thank you very much.
Donald H. Bullock - Eaton Corp. Plc
Our next question comes from Deane Dray with RBC.
Deane Dray - RBC Capital Markets LLC
Thank you. Good morning, everyone.
Richard H. Fearon - Eaton Corp. Plc
Hi.
Craig Arnold - Eaton Corp. Plc
Morning.
Deane Dray - RBC Capital Markets LLC
Hey, for Rick, like to get some more color regarding the working capital dynamics you touched on. Not surprised to see some working capital build with the increased order levels, but maybe some color on the pre-buy on the inventory ahead of the tariff noise and maybe you could size that for us.
Richard H. Fearon - Eaton Corp. Plc
Yeah, I think a simple way to think about it, Deane, and maybe to put it into context is that if you looked at our classic working capital at the end of June, namely receivables inventory less payables, and you compared – that number was about $4.7 billion, and if you compare that to our annualized sales in Q2, our working capital as a percentage of sales was 21.2%.
For most of the last couple of years, it's been between 19% to 20%. And the reason it's higher is exactly as you say. The growth in sales, particularly in some of these longer cycle project type businesses, caused receivables to increase. But we also both positioned inventory for the continued sales growth but also took some positions in order to forestall having to pay higher prices.
And the kind of numbers you're talking about in inventory increase are in the order of $100 million-ish kind of dollars, and so – but if you run through the math of 21.2% compared to 19% to 20% on average, you'll see that we definitely have opportunity to bring the working capital levels down as the year progresses.
Deane Dray - RBC Capital Markets LLC
That's real helpful. And then as a follow-up, I don't think I've heard data centers get called out so many times in a positive way in quite a while. So just want to circle back on this one. Is there any share gains in the quarter? And then maybe just, if you could, Craig, touch on the approach to servicing the hyperscale customer. They require a completely different set of architecture, hot switchovers and so forth. So what's working well in serving that part of the market?

Craig Arnold - Eaton Corp. Plc
Yeah, and I think to your point, quite frankly 2017 was a little bit of a surprise and a disappointment in terms of what happened in data centers given the underlying demand and the underlying growth in data generation and data consumption. So there's probably a little bit of catchup taking place this year in the market, but the long-term growth trends for data generation, I mean, it's growing at more than a 20% compounded rate a year, and so we think the long-term growth rate in data centers and hyperscale continues to be very, very positive.
I'd say that, to your point around a lot of the big hyperscale data center companies, they all have very unique architecture around the way they protect their data centers and the way they configure their data centers, and they will sometimes go through periods where they'll take a pause and they'll rethink the way their data centers are laid out. And so I think you'll find that some of that took place during the course of 2017, and there's perhaps new configurations that are coming out there today. But we're seeing very strong demand across all of the major players and data centers as they really build out their capability for this underlying growth in the market.
We do think we're taking some market share, but always difficult to tell for certain exactly where this is going to end up. But we, as a company, are very well positioned in terms of our global footprint, certainly in the UPS space but more importantly in the switchgear space. Our company is very well positioned. We have a very strong reputation with all the data center companies, and we think it's a place where we're going to continue to grow for some time to come.
Deane Dray - RBC Capital Markets LLC
That's great color. Thank you.
Donald H. Bullock - Eaton Corp. Plc
Our next question comes from Mig Dobre with Baird. I guess we'll move on to Andy Casey with Wells Fargo.
Andrew M. Casey - Wells Fargo Securities LLC
Thanks a lot. Excuse me. Question around the implied Q4 organic expectations. I'm backing into a deceleration of somewhere in the 2% to 4% range, but I know this can get thrown off by rounding in Q4 2017 comps. Can you comment on what's included in the current guidance for Q4?
Craig Arnold - Eaton Corp. Plc
Well – go ahead. You want to take it?
Richard H. Fearon - Eaton Corp. Plc
I was going to say, Andy, if you just look at the full-year guidance we've given and the third quarter guidance, you would see that the rate of growth on higher comps will not be quite as high in Q4. That's our expectation at the present time. Now normally, as you know, you do have sometimes a seasonal impact in Q4. We'll just have to see whether that seasonal impact occurs this year given how strong the underlying markets are.
Andrew M. Casey - Wells Fargo Securities LLC
Okay. So thank you, Rick. I should just look at that as kind of a placeholder given all the uncertainty?
Richard H. Fearon - Eaton Corp. Plc
Yes.
Andrew M. Casey - Wells Fargo Securities LLC
Okay. Thank you very much.
Donald H. Bullock - Eaton Corp. Plc
Our next question comes from Julian Mitchell with Barclays.
Julian Mitchell - Barclays Capital, Inc.
Good morning. Thank you for squeezing me in. My first question would just be around the backlog. You called it out a lot more in this call and in the slides than prior calls. Classically I guess your backlog is worth less than one quarter's worth of sales. I think it was about $5.2 billion at the end of March against sales in Q2 of $5.5 billion.
So I guess within ESS, Hydraulics, and Aerospace specifically where you call out the backlog, give us some idea of how much visibility you have in those three businesses in terms of that backlog, please.
Richard H. Fearon - Eaton Corp. Plc

I can take a stab at it. First of all, there are various businesses like Vehicle where we don't have backlogs or at least we don't regard them as stable, so we don't report them. So you need to factor that in.
But in general, if you look at our businesses and you look at backlogs over the ensuing 12 months, the backlogs, particularly in project businesses, can be 30% to 40% of the next 12 months. In a case like Aerospace, the backlog will be really high. I can't give you a precise number. And the reason is that the orders are placed well in advance. And so it's a mixed bag.
In Vehicle, we typically say we don't have backlogs. We do sort of have a general idea, but we don't have specific back logs. In Aerospace, it's very highly locked in. In larger project businesses it's probably 30% to 40%. And then in Electrical Products, it tends to be much more of a flow type business. So the backlogs are much lower coverage of the next 12 months' revenue.
Craig Arnold - Eaton Corp. Plc
And Julian, I'd say the reason we probably put more emphasis on backlog this time than perhaps in prior calls is there's been a lot written and speculated about where we are in the economic cycle, and so we're also looking at this thing just to get a sense for, are we continuing to grow our backlog and build strength into the future, or are things moving in a different direction? And we come away from our own assessment of the backlog and the fact that we're growing backlog in most of our businesses very positive around the outlook for the second half and 2019.
Julian Mitchell - Barclays Capital, Inc.
Thank you for that color. It's very helpful. Maybe following up, Rick, you touched on Vehicle where the concept of a backlog is not particularly useful. So maybe just flesh out a little bit the guidance for Vehicle. You grew low-double digits in the first half. The growth for the year is I think penciled in at about 6% organically. Maybe give us any help on how you're thinking about truck in Brazil and North America versus light vehicle in terms of your second half growth rates.
Richard H. Fearon - Eaton Corp. Plc
Well, you can see with the full-year guidance we've given for Vehicle that the growth rate in the back half of the year will be less than in the front half of the year. A lot of that has to do with prior-year comparisons. It also has to deal with some constraints on production that we're seeing in various parts of the market.
So as I think Craig mentioned, you saw very strong Class 8 growth in the first half of the year. It won't be as strong in the second half of the year. So those are some of the factors. But all, if you step back and look at the underlying direction of the vehicle markets, we see continued good growth in Class 8 in NAFTA. We see continued strength in the South American markets and broadly the automotive markets have performed a little bit better than we thought this year with growth in Europe and APAC and a little bit of a decline in the U.S. as expected. So we feel pretty good about the underlying tonality of the vehicle market.
Julian Mitchell - Barclays Capital, Inc.
Great. Thank you.
Donald H. Bullock - Eaton Corp. Plc
Our next question comes from Andrew Obin with B of A.
Andrew Burris Obin - Bank of America Merrill Lynch
Yeah, thanks for squeezing me in. Just a question on Hydraulics. Our channel checks indicated that on longer lead items I think lead times went up from months to over a year. And I'm just wondering now that your capacity has caught up, how long will it take to sort of adjust things in the channel? And I guess what I'm concerned about, are we going to see multiple quarters of negative orders or significant sort of volatility in growth rates? How long will it take to clear it through the system?

Craig Arnold - Eaton Corp. Plc
Yeah, that's a little bit of a difficult question to speculate on, Andrew. We certainly appreciate why you're asking it. I'd say for the most part, I'd say these changes take place relatively quickly, and as evidenced by what happened in our own business in Europe where a lot of the long lead time orders, the placeholders, if you will, that are put out six months to nine months out where people are just trying to hold a slot, those orders are relatively very quickly adjusted and changed.
And so I don't anticipate that it's going to take very much time at all for those adjustments to be made in the ordering pattern, whether it's through our OEMs where you see it more strongly or with distribution. So I think it's a relatively short adjustment.
Andrew Burris Obin - Bank of America Merrill Lynch
Got you. And then just a follow-up question on Aerospace. One of the themes at Farnborough I think was somebody described it as this bear hug from Boeing where Boeing is basically going to supply chain, asking for significant price concessions, asking for share of MRO business particularly to participate on NMA or 777X.
Can you sort of comment on what you guys are experiencing and how should we think about the profitability of the aerospace business long-term given Boeing's demands?
Craig Arnold - Eaton Corp. Plc
I'd say we've learned to dance with the bear, I'd say. We have certainly been involved with both Boeing and Airbus, and the things that they're trying to do strategically. And I'd say that suffice it to say that we have very effective working relationships with both Boeing and Airbus. We understand what their objectives are, and we think that there's plenty of room for win-win solutions with both Boeing and Airbus, finding ways to continue to grow our business and participate more fully in what they do, and also be responsive to what their requirements are.
So we don't think that the initiatives that are taking place today inside of Airbus or Boeing, we don't think either one of those two will be problematic for our teams to manage in the course of business.
Andrew Burris Obin - Bank of America Merrill Lynch
So no structural change of profitability going forward with the new contract structure?
Craig Arnold - Eaton Corp. Plc
No, none whatsoever.
Andrew Burris Obin - Bank of America Merrill Lynch
Fantastic. Thanks a lot.
Donald H. Bullock - Eaton Corp. Plc
Our last question today comes from Mig Dobre. Looks like we had a little problem with the queue earlier, Mig. I'm going to turn it over to you for the last question of the day.
Mircea Dobre - Robert W. Baird & Co., Inc.
Great. Can you hear me now?
Donald H. Bullock - Eaton Corp. Plc
Yeah, perfect.
Mircea Dobre - Robert W. Baird & Co., Inc.
Okay. Perfect. Perfect. So one last question on Lighting for me. One of your competitors mentioned that this might actually be one area that benefits from 301 tariffs. And I know that obviously you're not at the lower end of the market, but I'm wondering what your perspective is as to how industry dynamics might change here, and is it feasible to think that, broadly speaking, pressure on profitability sort of shifts and you actually get some tailwinds into 2019?
Craig Arnold - Eaton Corp. Plc
Yeah, no, and we certainly have looked at 301 in the context of that same issue and whether or not it should be a net benefit to our Lighting business. At this juncture I would say that it's too early. It's very possible that with tariffs being put on lighting products coming out of China and a lot of the low-end lighting coming from China that there is in fact a bit of tailwind and help for the market and the industry overall.
But I would just say the way we think about it today is it's just too early to judge whether it's going to play out that way, and it's not baked into our forecast that way, and if it turns out to be a net positive, it certainly would be a bit of upside for us.

Mircea Dobre - Robert W. Baird & Co., Inc.
Appreciate it. Thank you.
Donald H. Bullock - Eaton Corp. Plc
With that, we'll wrap up our call and question-and-answer today. As always, Chip and I will be available for any follow-up questions you might have afterward, and thank you very much for joining us today.
Operator
That does conclude your conference for today. Thank you for your participation and for using AT&T Executive Teleconference. You may now disconnect.PepsiCo Inc (NASDAQ:PEP) Q2 2018 Earnings Conference Call July 10, 2018  7:45 AM ET
Executives
Jamie Caulfield - Senior Vice President, Investor Relations
Indra Nooyi - Chairman and Chief Executive Officer
Hugh Johnston - Chief Financial Officer
Analysts
Dara Mohsenian - Morgan Stanley
Andrea Teixeira - JPMorgan
Pablo Zuanic - SIG
Bryan Spillane - Bank of America
Ali Dibadj - Bernstein
Judy Hong - Goldman Sachs
Lauren Lieberman - Barclays
Steve Powers - Deutsche Bank
Bonnie Herzog - Wells Fargo
Amit Sharma - BMO Capital Markets
Mark Swartzberg - Stifel
Robert Ottenstein - Evercore
Nik Modi - RBC Capital Markets
Bill Chappell - SunTrust
Operator
Good morning and welcome to PepsiCo’s Second Quarter 2018 Earnings Conference Call. Your lines have been placed on listen-only until the question-and-answer session. [Operator Instructions] Today’s call is being recorded and will be archived at www.pepsico.com. It is now my pleasure to introduce Mr. Jamie Caulfield, Senior Vice President of Investor Relations. Mr. Caulfield, you may begin.
Jamie Caulfield
Thank you, operator. With me today are Indra Nooyi, PepsiCo’s Chairman and CEO and Hugh Johnston, PepsiCo’s CFO. We will lead off today’s call with a review of our second quarter performance and full year 2018 outlook and then we will move on to Q&A.
Before we begin, please take note of our cautionary statement. This conference call includes forward-looking statements, including statements regarding 2018 guidance based on currently available information. Forward-looking statements inherently involve risks and uncertainties that could cause our actual results to differ materially from those predicted. Statements made on this conference call should be considered together with cautionary statements and other information contained in today’s earnings release and in our most recent periodic reports filed with the SEC.
When discussing our financial results on today’s call, we will refer to certain non-GAAP measures, which exclude certain items, such as the impact of the U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act and other tax related items, foreign exchange translation and acquisitions, divestitures, structural and other changes from our reported results. You should refer to the Glossary and other attachments to this morning’s earnings release and to the Investors section of PepsiCo’s website under the Events and Presentations tab to find full explanations and reconciliations of these non-GAAP measures.
Now, it’s my pleasure to introduce Indra Nooyi.
Indra Nooyi
Thank you, Jamie and good morning everyone and thank you all for joining us. We will start off with an overview of second quarter performance and a discussion of each of the operating sectors in a little more detail and then Hugh will cover the full year outlook.
For the quarter, we delivered $16.1 billion of net revenue driven by 2.6% organic revenue growth and core earnings of $1.61 per share, a 7% increase on a core constant currency basis. Overall, we are pleased with our operating and financial performance in the quarter especially given continued commodity inflation and other headwinds in the quarter such as the Brazil transportation strike. In the quarter, organic revenue growth accelerated sequentially from the first quarter. The majority of our businesses performed very well, with particularly strong performances by Frito-Lay North America and each of the international sectors and NAB, North American Beverages posted another quarter of sequential improvement in both organic revenue and operating profit performance.
Frito-Lay North America delivered balanced volume growth and net price realization driven by great marketplace execution, innovation and creative brand marketing. For example to address consumers’ desire for greater flavor and product variety in single-serve multi-packs, we launched a 20-count Family Fun mix that includes an array of products from Lay’s to Cheetos to Ruffles with an expanded mix of flavors and this clearly help drive 10% net revenue growth in our overall variety pack business. We launched Ruffles Mozzarella 'n Marinara, our latest bar food inspired flavor to meet the expectations of existing fans and capture the attention of new consumers seeking a unique and fun flavor experience. And this contributed to Ruffles 10% net revenue growth in the quarter. And Doritos Blaze launched earlier this year with the most talked about Super Bowl ad continues to perform well above our initial expectations and contributed to 6% net revenue growth in trademark Doritos in Q2. So overall, we are feeling very good about Frito-Lay North America’s performance and momentum.

Turning to North American Beverages, the marketplace remains highly dynamic, but generally rational. With this as a backdrop, we are encouraged by the trending improvement in both net revenue and operating profit performance. After a slow start in the earlier part of the second quarter both for the category and North American Beverages, we saw momentum improve and a return to net revenue growth in the back half of Q2. Within the business, trademark Pepsi continued to make progress towards more stable performance. As we mentioned last quarter, we have stepped up media support on trademark Pepsi under the Pepsi generation’s campaign. As a result in the second quarter, we began to see improvement in a number of key brand health metrics that is leading to better net revenue performance as the year progresses. So, we intend to stay the course increasing investment behind brand support in the second half of the year with the aim of driving further top line improvement. At the same time, we remain laser focused on higher growth categories with appropriate brand investment and robust innovation. For example, bubly, a cleverly marketed new entrant in the fast growing sparkling water segment launched earlier this year and it continues to perform exceedingly well.
Gatorade Zero, our latest hydration innovation with zero sugar and all the electrolytes of Gatorade just launched and is off to a great start. More importantly, trends on overall Gatorade performance have also recently accelerated and we are excited by the return of Mountain Dew Baja Blast, our summer limited time offer that just hit the shelves. So overall, we have seen sequential quarterly improvement at NAB and we expect to see continued acceleration in top line performance in the third quarter.
At Quaker Foods North America, our hot cereal business posted its fourth consecutive quarter of market share gains and delivered mid single-digit retail sales growth supported by our new ad campaign highlighting the functional benefits of oatmeal. In addition, Quaker light snacks had double-digit retail sales growth in our Aunt Jemima pancake business, grew both retail sales and market share for the seventh consecutive quarter.
Turning now to our sectors outside of North America, we are pleased with more than 6% organic revenue growth we saw in our developing and emerging market as a group. Strong marketplace execution combined with stable macro conditions have led to continued solid growth across many of our key international markets though growth was negatively impacted by the 11-day transportation strike that broadly disrupted commerce in Brazil. Within Latin America, organic revenue grew 3.5% driven by mid single-digit digit growth in Mexico and double-digit growth in Argentina and Colombia. We estimate the Brazil strike depressed overall net revenue growth for Latin America by approximately 2 percentage points.
In our Europe sub-Saharan Africa sector, Russia, Poland and South Africa each grew organic revenue high single-digits and Turkey had double-digit organic revenue growth. Even within the developed markets of Europe, we saw mid single-digit organic revenue growth in the UK and high single-digit growth in France. And in AMENA, we had strong double-digit organic revenue growth in China and Egypt, high single-digit organic revenue growth in Pakistan and Australia, and solid mid single-digit organic revenue growth in India. This strong top line performance translated into impressive bottom line results with core constant currency operating profit up 12% in our international divisions as a group fueled by fundamental operating performance and the gain this year from the Thailand refranchising partially offset by lapping the gain from our sale of Britvic shares in 2017.

The international results are in part a reflection of our efforts to increasingly lift and shift successful initiatives from one market to many and innovating on our big global brands in locally relevant ways. For instance, in Latin America, we are innovating with Quaker Super Foods, a new premium platform with differentiated ingredients such as oats with rye, amaranth, flaxseed and quinoa. In ESSA, we have lifted and shifted Off the Eaten Path, a premium range of plant-based snacks from the U.S. to the United Kingdom. And in AMENA, we have taken our successful Sunbites platform from the U.S. to Australia by launching Sunbites Grain Waves Plus with the goodness of Australian whole grain corn, wheat and oats for beetroot and sweet potato. At the same time, they have also launched in the U.S., Red Rock Deli, one of our most successful brands in Australia. Net, we are encouraged by the momentum we are seeing across many of our key international markets. NAB is making steady improvement and Frito-Lay North America is performing well. Importantly, as we have managed the business for strong performance today, we are also taking steps to enable to continue to perform well in the decades ahead. We are pleased to report that in the coming days we will publish our most recent sustainability report discussing our progress against and commitments to our sustainability goals.
We encourage you to read the full report, but I’d like to take just a few minutes this morning to provide you with the highlights. We are in millions of pantries and refrigerators worldwide. So we know we have a tremendous opportunity and responsibility to use our scale to make a positive impact on the world. Our customers, employees and partners feel good knowing that there is a shared journey of sustainable transformation making our products more nutritious and more resource efficient, dialing up the taste while reducing our environmental footprint. Our investors can feel good knowing this makes us a stronger business over the long-term, that we can also do well by also doing good. 12 years ago, we embarked on a journey of PepsiCo, as we call, Performance with Purpose. Since then, much has changed at PepsiCo and around the world, but the underlying principles behind Performance with Purpose remain. Much of our early work on Performance with Purpose requires us to think differently about our business and make the kinds of long-term investments from researching and developing new more nutritious products to finding ways to reduce water and energy use across plants and farms that will help us deliver on the vision of making our growth, our operations and our impact more sustainable. Sustainability has been defined as meeting the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. Over the last dozen years, we have tried to meet the needs of the present, while strengthening the ability of future generations to meet this integrating that aspiration into our goals for products, planet and people.
Let me briefly comment on each. When it comes to products, we have built on our legacy as the first company to voluntarily remove trans-fats from our snacks by reducing added sugars, sodium and saturated fat in many of our products launching a revolutionary nutrition-focused vending option, Hello Goodness and growing our portfolio of what we define as Good for You and Better for You options from about 38% of revenue in 2006 to roughly 50% last year. We also teamed up with others in our industry to form The Healthy Weight Commitment Foundation removing 6.4 trillion calories from our food and beverage products surpassing our collective pledge by more than 400%. And through Food for Good, we have provided 18 million nutritious servings to low income U.S. families since 2009.

Regarding planet, we have raised the bar for what it means to be a responsible corporate water steward earning the prestigious Stockholm Industry Water Award. We have invested more than $40 million since 2006 to provide safe water access around the world benefiting nearly 16 million people in some of the planet’s most water stress regions. We have also made our delivery fleet more energy efficient eliminating the need for over 1 million gallons of diesel fuel since our electric vehicle initiative began in 2010. The equivalent of keeping more than 2,000 passenger cars off the road for the year, while also making our beverage coolers and vending machines 60% more energy-efficient and we are one of the world’s largest purchasers of recycled PET. In fact if more recycled PET were available we would buy it. We have also launched the first 100% compostable chip bag in test markets, while diverting more and more of our waste from landfill, approximately 95% as of 2017. And for people, we have re-imagined what it means to support our associates from ushering onsite and near-site childcare campuses around the world to expanding PepsiCo University’s online course offerings to help associates upgrade their skills to navigate our rapidly changing world. We have also helped lift up the communities we serve playing a critical role in disaster relief efforts from Texas to Florida and Puerto Rico, Mexico to Ecuador and China to the Philippines.
While we still have work to do in certain areas, we are incredibly proud of the progress we have made. Our aspiration of being a good company, good ethically and good commercially continues to come to fruition using a broader, more lasting impact than we ever imagined and setting a standard that companies across our industry and beyond aspire to meet. Looking ahead, we will continue viewing our work through both the microscope and a telescope, focusing on the most granular details, grams of saturated fats, parts per billion of greenhouse gas, the number of women in management roles as well as the larger ambition of building a business that acts in accordance with our values, each of us striving to do what’s right for the company and what is right for our communities, because at the end of the day, there is no separating the two.
With that, let me turn it over to Hugh.
Hugh Johnston
Thank you, Indra and good morning everyone. I will just provide a quick update on the outlook and then we will move to your questions. From a macro perspective, we maintain a fairly positive view overall. However within this broadly positive picture, there remains risk of volatility both in geographic markets as we saw in Brazil in the most recent quarter and in currencies as witnessed by the recent sharp rise in the strength of the U.S. dollar. From an industry standpoint, we continue to see pretty challenging conditions, including a dynamic retail and consumer landscape, a very competitive environment and ongoing commodity inflation. So putting this all together in considering our year-to-date performance, our guidance for 2018 remains unchanged. Specifically, we expect organic revenue growth at least in line with our 2017 growth rate or 2.3%.
As we move through the year, our expectation is that we will continue to see some levels of gross margin compression from inflationary input costs. Normally, you would expect to see the gross margin contraction offset with SG&A productivity, but as we have stated previously with the benefit of a lower effective tax rate in 2018, we are making investments to fortify the business as well as having funded the U.S. frontline bonus and these investments will largely offset productivity driven margin improvement. We expect our core effective tax rate to be in the low 20s and we expect core earnings per share of $5.70 or a 9% increase compared to 2017 core earnings per share of $5.23.

We expect to continue to generate strong cash flow and to exercise disciplined capital allocation with prudent reinvestment into the business. For 2018, we continue to expect free cash flow of approximately $6 billion, which includes approximately $9 billion in cash flow from operations, including a $1.4 billion discretionary pension contribution made in the first quarter and net capital spending of approximately $3.6 billion. We continue to expect to return approximately $7 billion to shareholders in 2018 with cash dividends of approximately $5 billion, reflecting a 15% increase in the annualized dividend per share that began with the June payment and share repurchases of approximately $2 billion.
Finally, as you update your models I’d like to highlight the following. We expect our rate of earnings growth to be substantially higher in the fourth than in the third quarter. This is due to the timing of investments and the lapse associated with last year’s natural disasters. In addition, we expect the previously announced refranchising of our Czech Republic, Hungary and Slovakia business operations to benefit our fourth quarter earnings, and finally based on market consensus forecast, we expect foreign exchange translation to negatively impact both net revenue and operating profit in the second half of the year reversing the ForEx benefits that we had in the first half.
With that operator, we are ready to take the first question. Operator?
Indra Nooyi
Hello. Operator?
Jamie Caulfield
Hi, it’s Jamie Caulfield. We appear to be experiencing some technical difficulties in having your questions fed to us. So if I could ask you just to remain patient for a minute while we sort this out. Thank you.
Question-and-Answer Session
Operator
[Operator Instructions] Your first question comes from the line of Dara Mohsenian of Morgan Stanley.
Indra Nooyi
Good morning, Dara.
Dara Mohsenian
Hey, good morning. So, Indra, clearly, there has been a lot of investor focus around the number of pressure points in the CPG industry in terms of pricing power brand demand fragmentation etcetera, etcetera and basically that some of the traditional advantages of larger CPG companies are breaking down. In that context, I was hoping you could give us some perspective on if there are areas of significant investment or operational changes at Pepsi going forward beyond what you have already done to help position the company versus some of those industry challenge is and how realistic a long-term high single-digit earnings growth algorithm beyond 2018 is if you need to reinvest it again some of those pressure points? And within that answer I was hoping specifically you could touch on price mix, you have obviously had strong pricing realization in the last few years with the inflationary commodities in the trade and tariff risk, I’d love some updated thoughts on price mix also within that? Thanks.
Indra Nooyi
Thanks, Dara. And first of all, I think you asked me about 10 questions within one question, but given that we had this technical difficulty, I guess you are entitled to ask these 10 questions. I think you asked a sort of very, very interesting questions, I think the changes we are seeing in the industry are quite interesting and I think the changes that we are seeing benefit companies that have already invested to build scale, building international footprint and have the right partnerships around the world. I think now it’s not the time for companies to go and plant flags in new countries and try to startup businesses. So, I’d actually observe that the advantage CPG companies are small, niche single country companies with small brands who grow it to a certain level and then flip it or very large established scale companies who build businesses in multiple geographies. And I don’t mean just planting the flag actually built scale. And I think PepsiCo is one of those few companies that have actually over the years invested to build scale, put the right partnerships in place, built a diversified portfolio and actually solidified our presence and we made all the investments over the years.

So that part of the investment is behind us. This next tranche of investments relate to digitalization thinking through more automation in our plants, in our go-to-market systems figuring out how we can unleash more productivity, but more efficiency and effectiveness not just efficiency, if efficiency and effectiveness so that we can serve the changing retail world in more efficient and productive base, because retailers are going to go through their own changes and they are going to look at a few players to be the anchor suppliers to them while they handle with all kinds of changes with a large portion of the CPG world. And I think PepsiCo with its DSD systems and with its high velocity categories, its brand portfolio, and most importantly, innovation becomes a very valuable partner across the world. I mean I have often said this to you, when we had just snacks and beverages going to large European retailers, we were like 37 in a number of 50 on the list now with our combined approach and the Power of One approach, we are in the top 5 or top 7 suppliers driving a lot of the growth. They look at us and say there are these large companies the drive a lot of growth in our anchor suppliers that we should just have great relationships with, leave them aside, while we focus on all of the other players that we need to either prune the portfolio or figure out how to make them more efficient. So we are making investments in digitalization, more automation in plants, rethinking our innovation process and making sure that we fragment or segment our innovation between premium, mid and value and deal with each country and each marketplace with that sort of an architecture. And then we are getting better and better lifting and shifting across the world. So, there I don’t think that a big burst of innovation required. All that we are doing is investing as we go along. And I think Hugh talked about the fact that we have been making investments in the business. We have been doing that deliberately and carefully over the years. And we are going to continue to do that. We are going to look for ways to unleash productivity and every time we have productivity we are going to see how we judiciously reinvest in the business that we can keep this engine going. And in terms of price mix, innovation is a big driver of price mix as is revenue management and we are improving our revenue management skills all the time applying more digital tools. When it comes to innovation, we are thinking more and more about segmenting on innovation and we are also thinking about how to incubate a niche company within our big company and that’s what we are focused on in every big region of the world. So overall, we feel very comfortable with our overall strategy.
Operator
Your next question comes from the line of Andrea Teixeira of JPMorgan.
Andrea Teixeira
Hi, thank you and good morning. So I appreciate your answer to that, but I was hoping if you can update us on your outlook for NAB since the last call as you are considering strategic alternatives? And in light of this combined approach with technology I just mentioned using the European example I would appreciate if you can elaborate? Thank you.
Indra Nooyi
I will provide some opening comments, Andrea and then pass it to Hugh to give more color. What we told you in the last call is that you should expect to see sequential improvement in North American Beverage performance. That’s exactly what we are focused on and that’s what we are delivering. Every part of the business in North American Beverages is showing sequential improvement. In the second part of Q2, we saw significant improvement in performance and as we go into Q3, we feel good about the trend rate. We are playing a very responsible game in terms of advertising and pricing. And with commodity inflation, we will continue to play a responsible – take a responsible position in this marketplace by pushing through pricing. So at the end of the day, our North American Beverage business, which participates in a highly competitive category needs to be managed very, very carefully especially at a time when there are changes in the marketplace from lots of competitive activity. And look there is always going to be short-term preservations when our competitors go through major changes in their business models, our challenge is to maintain a very steady hand and make the PepsiCo portfolio work for us and that’s what we have been doing. I don’t know Hugh if you want to add anything to this?

Hugh Johnston
The only thing I would add, Indra, is hopefully you all have seen that this management team is always focused on creating value both in the short-term and in the long-term and achieving the right balance between the two. And as we look at all of the businesses that, that is our most significant focus and I think we will continue to do that just as we have.
Operator
Your next question comes from the line of Pablo Zuanic of SIG.
Indra Nooyi
Good morning Pablo.
Pablo Zuanic
Thank you. Good morning, Indra. Good morning, everyone. Two quick questions. One, I understand that you are reinvesting in the tax benefits, but can you clarify whether that’s more heavily geared to reinvesting in beverages or is it pretty much evenly across the business? And the second question which is related to that when you see a success that Coca-Cola has had with the Diet Coke new products and with Coca-Cola Zero Sugar, any thoughts in terms of how things would be done different on the Pepsi side of things? And the reason I asked that is that if the brands themselves having been improved in terms of innovation, how much is reinvestment and more marketing going to help? Thanks.
Indra Nooyi
Pablo, we reinvested tax benefits on additional media for NAB and wherever the businesses needed investment, we put it in. The idea is not just to invest, it’s to reinvest judiciously, so that we get return from the investments. And we also reinvested some of the tax benefits in our frontline bonus, so that especially people in the United States where the tax benefits of really accrued can benefit from the upside. Now, when it comes to our North American Beverage business, we are investing in CSDs, especially trademark Pepsi. And we are investing more in trademark Pepsi, because we saw stepped up investment in media from our competition. So we are doing that. When it comes to the Zero Sugar portfolio both between Diet Pepsi and Pepsi Zero Sugar, Pepsi Zero Sugar is growing extremely well. I mean, it’s – I hate to use the word flying off the shelves but is doing exceedingly well. When it comes to Diet Pepsi, Diet Pepsi is also back to good performance. And I have to tell you the flavor portfolio on Diet Pepsi and whatever competition launched, you might want to look at the numbers in a little bit more detail, because I think it’s a mixed bag. We have to be careful not to throw too much innovation to this marketplace and sort of obfuscate the numbers from our perspective, Zero Sugar portfolio between Diet and Zero Sugar is doing well and is doing well on the sustained consistent basis and we are playing the long game, Pablo, in terms of overall liquid refreshment beverages. And we think that, that’s the right way to play this beverage game and we feel good about where we are headed.
Operator
Your next question comes from the line of Bryan Spillane of Bank of America.
Bryan Spillane
Hey, good morning everyone.
Indra Nooyi
Good morning, Bryan.
Bryan Spillane
Hugh, I just wanted to pickup on you made a comment in terms of the forward guidance about gross margins still being under pressure in the second half. So, I guess couple of questions. I guess that implies we should expect that gross margins might be down in the second half? And then maybe what some of the pressure points are what’s sort of inflation and I guess also maybe transactional FX, if you could just kind of walk us through what’s going to drive that pressure in gross margins in the second half and maybe what mitigation you might have as we look forward into ‘19?
Hugh Johnston
Yes, Bryan, happy to do that. So, a couple of comments. When I say gross margins under pressure, I am talking about relatively nominal pressures we have seen over the last several quarters. A combination of a couple of factors on gross margin, number one, obviously commodity inflation has picked up a bit. Certainly, we have seen a bit more in oil and in addition to that in aluminum; second, transport costs have also been under some pressure with the driver shortage in the United States; and then third, in international markets, as you know where we have seen some inflation, we do tend to price a bit behind inflation and try to drive productivity in order to offset that and then obviously we are reinvesting the tax benefit in the form of new capabilities. So, you don’t see the productivity flow through as you normally might in SG&A. So, those are the several factors that are driving it. Overall as I said, we expect full year to be on the 9% that we originally committed to and we are balancing the internal workings of the P&L to make that happen.

Operator
Your next question comes from the line of Ali Dibadj of Bernstein.
Indra Nooyi
Good morning, Ali.
Ali Dibadj
Hey, guys. So just wanted to ask a little bit more about the sustainability of your results going forward along three dimensions. First, is the sustainability of one-timers like Thailand and Britvic and coming up on Czech Republic here in your core results, should we continue to expect things like that to be a consistent part of your algorithm going forward? How much more of those types of things you have to sell? Second, in terms of pricing, it continues to be a big driver obviously for Latin America and you are willing to continue to sacrifice a little bit of volume there again, how much longer you think that sustainable? And then third on NAB improvements very pleased that they are on track both you and I, can you give us more about whether you believe that was actually driven by advertising increases, was there an advertising increase in particular in NAB overall as opposed to just Pepsi, could you call that Pepsi, because you called out Pepsi, but I don’t see it in the release for the segment, NAB or is there something else that drove that improvement and so will that improvement you guys believe continue not just going to this quarter, but going forward?
Indra Nooyi
I am going to take the third one and then Hugh, I am going to toss it to you to talk about the first two, okay. NAB improvement, again, Ali as I mentioned, we are playing the LRB game. We are looking to improve our position in the liquid refreshment beverage category, because we play in pretty much every category in LRB most of them with very, very strong brands. And in terms of A&M spending, we increased A&M spending on trademark Pepsi as we mentioned we were going to do and because the A&M gets curved in, you will see the benefits flowing through in Q3 and Q4 more as we go through and we are seeing the improvement in brand health metrics and we are seeing a sequential improvement in the performance of the business. So believe me, we have focused maniacally on tracking the performance and the result of all of our increased spending. And what we are seeing in the results, that gives us confidence to tell you what we told you on the call today. So on balance, we are feeling good about the NAB performance trends. Now, let me turn it to Hugh to talk about the one-timers and pricing, especially in countries like – regions like Latin America.
Hugh Johnston
Yes, happy to, Ali. In terms of one-timers, if you look at our record over the last 4 or 5 years, we have always had some one-timers whether it’s refranchising the businesses or sales of businesses or assets. So that’s going to continue to be a factor as it has been. In terms of Latin America, without a doubt, where you have high inflation environments, we have tended to price through the vast majority of that inflation. And as a result, it’s improved our revenue results sometimes at the expense of volume. As you see the inflation rates come down in those countries, obviously our pricing will diminish, but we do expect that our volume will pickup as a result of that and we expect to continue to see strong results out of Latin America and other places that have historically had high inflation where the numbers have come down a bit.
Indra Nooyi
But I think the most important thing on one-timers, we don’t do one-timers to deliver earnings, we do one-timers because we think it’s the right business model for those countries and what we are trying to do is to strengthen the core business, so that they have the right partner to boost the performance of that beverage business in certain markets we will franchise it to them and if think we have better off operating it, we will do that. So I think we use one-timers in a very judicious strategic way to improve the overall performance of the company.

Operator
Your next question comes from the line of Judy Hong of Goldman Sachs.
Judy Hong
Good morning. So, Indra, I guess I just wanted to get a little bit more color on the Gatorade performance, trends have gotten a little better recently the comps are getting easier, so maybe that’s also helping. But just wanted to also get a better sense of maybe some of the brand health metrics that you talked about is really to maybe that was I think more of a Pepsi trademark comment, but on Gatorade specifically? And then as you think about Gatorade Zero, a little bit more color just in terms of the positioning of that particular line and how much marketing investments that you are making on that line? Thanks.
Indra Nooyi
Gatorade is actually doing very well and this weather is helping for sure, but the underlying Gatorade trademark is very, very strong and Gatorade always attracts new players into the marketplace and they come in with either lower prices or they try to come in and build distribution and they might take a few share points in any quarter or two, but then over time if you look at it over a period of 5 or 7 years, the Gatorade franchise has been extremely resilient and is basically held on to its leadership position. We have innovated to build shoulders with the Gatorade recovery drinks, the Gatorade Chews before you start exercising and then we have segmented along flavors and then across different sports. Many of our consumers wanted a Gatorade Zero for the light exercise who didn’t want the carbohydrates that real athletes needed and so we launched Gatorade Zero. Even though there is Propel also, they wanted to be seen with the Gatorade. So, we launched Gatorade Zero and we keep advertising along the entire trademark and we have never wavered from advertising to athletes and to active exercises and that’s going to be the continued focus of Gatorade. It’s a very strong resilient franchise and we feel good about where it is and where it’s headed.
Operator
Your next question comes from the line of Lauren Lieberman of Barclays.
Indra Nooyi
Good morning, Lauren.
Lauren Lieberman
Good morning. Thanks. I was curious you had mentioned sort of two different types of comments around brands and innovations. So one bucket was sort of the discussion of lift and shift continuing to support and build your biggest franchises and then Indra you also mentioned the idea of incubating niche brands or companies within market? So, I was curious if you could kind of put those two together and in particular what I have been most curious about is how PepsiCo is thinking about a small brand strategy if you want or need to have one in the beverage business, because when I look at some of the work you have done in the last 2 years, LIFEWTR, bubly, it’s very much a strategy of drive a blockbuster win, not build something slowly and patiently through single serve and discovery. So, I was curious your thoughts around the viability of a small brand strategy within PepsiCo and if that was something you are were focusing on? Thanks.
Indra Nooyi
Actually, it’s a great question, Lauren. Actually, if I look back especially the last 5 years of beverages, we have had some spectacular new products which for any small startup company would have been a blockbuster, but for PepsiCo because we have put it through DSD system unless it reaches the scale of a LIFEWTR or bubly in the first 12 to 18 months, we can’t support it, because many times the space has to come out of the core cooler or the core isle and so we look at differential velocity and then the DSD system tends to kill it. And if I look at products like Lemon Lemon from last year, it was rated the best new product launch of last year. It reached a pretty impressive level of sales yet on the DSD system I didn’t do that well, because it was cannibalizing space from a core CSD category. So what we have created now is this new entity within PepsiCo called The Hive. It’s a separate group just like we did with e-commerce we have taken it out of the core headquarters. It’s going to be an entrepreneurial group that’s going to take some of the best new products that we launched and reached a certain size, but we never really allowed it to thrive in the DSD system we were nurtured and incubated in whatever distribution system they think is the best for it and when it reaches a certain size, we can decide whether it should come into the DSD system or not. And this group is also going to look at other venturing brands they can bring in and we want to create an environment where we have a business within a business, a small entrepreneurial sort of agile group that’s thinking about the new age consumer that loves discovery brands, while allowing the big brands to thrive in the overall mothership. And this is not new to PepsiCo North America we are doing something like this in Europe. It’s a very local business. So we have to be careful not to make it global. It’s a very local business and we are going to play with these businesses, because there is a consumer that is willing to pay for discovery brands and they can reach a decent level of growth and so we are going to go off and see how to make it happen. We are feeling excited about what we have just launched. Let’s see what happens in the next few months and years.

Operator
Your next question comes from the line of Steve Powers of Deutsche Bank.
Steve Powers
Hey, good morning. Thanks. So going back to North America Beverages for a minute, it does indeed look like we are on track for a return to growth in the second half, which is great. I just love a little bit more context about what you might feel that the top success factors in that path, whether it’s key launch like Gatorade Zero better realize price mix as inflation builds more of an inflection in core Pepsi or just are there one or two priorities on your scorecard that you could call out for us that will be great? And then secondly as you have been open about your ongoing assessment of strategic options for the bottling utility as you called it whether that’s constituting a standalone entity you are putting in the hands of multiple franchisees or keeping it as part of PepsiCo. I am just curious as to whether or not you have narrowed in on any subset of those options or what the timeframe might be for you be in a position to communicate your path forward to market? Thanks.
Indra Nooyi
Hugh?
Hugh Johnston
Yes, Steve, happy to answer those questions. First, in terms of the priorities, if nothing else what we saw last year and we have certainly seen in this year we need to be able to both make sure the big businesses are on track in North America Beverages, those big businesses obviously are Pepsi, Mountain Dew and Gatorade. What we have seen over the last couple of quarters is certainly a strengthening in the Mountain Dew business both the core green bottle business as well as the innovation with Ice and now the return of Baja Blast, which has always been a Mountain Dew fan favorite. Second, obviously is Gatorade. Gatorade certainly is a business that’s now back on track and we are very excited about the innovation. Gatorade Zero really meets, I think a very unmet need for the lapse Gatorade user, because as Indra pointed out earlier, they just don’t want the calories, but they want the Gatorade brand. And then Pepsi, where we knew we needed to increase the advertising, we knew we needed to have a good campaign this year that obviously takes longer to do. The quantity is easier to turn on, but just getting it into consumer’s minds takes a period of time. So first sort of big priority is making sure the big businesses are doing well. Second is continue to execute against the innovations in the newer categories whether it’s bubly or continuing to execute LIFEWTR or continuing to make sure newer brands like KeVita do well. That’s the additive that sort of creates the growth in the business. The core brands grow at a certain rate and all of those new innovations create the incremental growth. So, I think we need to be able to do both North America Beverages obviously a big nuance complex business and we need to do more than one or two things well. We need to do most things well for that business to perform and that’s what you see happening. Regarding strategic options nothing new to report on that, we will continue to look at options to create value not only in that business, but across all of our businesses.
Operator
Your next question comes from the line of Bonnie Herzog of Wells Fargo.
Indra Nooyi
Hey, Bonnie. Good morning.
Bonnie Herzog
Thank you. Hi, good morning. So I just wanted to talk about Frito-Lay North America, your growth really has been impressive both on the top and bottom line. So, how sustainable is this from a long-term perspective? And then could you guys walk through for us any productivity initiatives that you have specifically implemented in Frito-Lay that you possibly could implement across the rest of your businesses? Thanks.
Indra Nooyi
On the Frito-Lay, the reason the growth is impressive is because Frito-Play plays in salty snacks and the entire macro snacks space is there for the taking. And so Frito-Lay focuses on the core and then inches out of the core by taking occasions from the rest of macro snacks and the innovation engine is very geared to going out and building both frequency and penetration and picking up more and more snacking occasions. And as long as they keep doing that, they should be able to deliver the group. The DSD apparatus is an extremely impressive machine and that actually helps sustain Frito-Lay’s growth. In terms of productivity initiatives, we have talked about GES, Bonnie. GES is now rolling out to multiple locations. It’s doing two things. One is delivering more productivity, but more importantly, it’s de-bottlenecking the system because it’s allowing us to put more SKUs and be more customer-specific in our picking. And so GES has actually been a big benefit for us and then deploying more digital technologies across Frito-Lay is actually delivering more productivity. The good news is as North America – tools that North American Beverages develops goes to Frito-Lay and what Frito-Lay develops, comes to North America. And so we have a wonderful transfer of knowledge and tests that’s happening between the two businesses and so we can take the customer base both traditional trade up and down the street and big organized accounts and figure out how to serve them better, whether you call it geo box at our beverage business or GES in Frito-Lay, there is a lot of information exchange going on. And overall, I think both businesses are high velocity businesses and they are able to unleash productivity to reinvest to keep this growth engine going. Do you want to add anything, Hugh?

Hugh Johnston
No, I think you captured it very well.
Operator
Your next question comes from the line of Amit Sharma of BMO Capital Markets.
Amit Sharma
Hi, good morning everyone. Hugh, a quick clarification, you did say you expect to take pricing in NAB CSGs, can you talk about how quickly we should expect you to rollout pricing and to what extent? And then another one, gas prices are now multiyear high, are you seeing any change in consumer behavior, especially in the C-Store channel?
Hugh Johnston
Yes, to answer your first question first, I think you will see incremental pricing benefit in the third quarter and then you will see more in the fourth quarter. Regarding gas prices, convenience channel was up about 3% I believe overall for the second quarter. So I think given the healthiness of the overall economy that’s more than offsetting the gas price increases.
Operator
Your next question comes from the line of Mark Swartzberg of Stifel.
Mark Swartzberg
Yes, thanks. Good morning. Hugh, just for you on CapEx, could you remind us why the $3.6 billion is higher than it’s been historically and how representative you think that is of future CapEx either in absolute terms or relative to sales?
Hugh Johnston
Yes. So, our previously discussed long-term guidance is equal to or less than 5% of net revenue, no update on that right now, bigger investments in a couple of places. Latin America, we have seen capital spending go up as we have implemented some of the GES solutions that Indra has mentioned on the previous question. Number two, we are investing more in Frito-Lay, because we are identifying projects to drive continued growth in productivity. And number three, North America Beverage as the single-serve strategy has continued to be successful we are adding capacity in certain places.
Operator
Your next question comes from the line of Robert Ottenstein of Evercore.
Robert Ottenstein
Great. Thank you very much. And Indra in the past you have given us a little bit more color in terms of market share gains and value share gains and clearly you are doing very well outside of the U.S. Can you perhaps give us a little bit of sense of where you are gaining share and importantly international markets and where things are more challenging? And then secondly, bubly off to a great start, perhaps if you could maybe stand back a little bit and give us a sense of where you see yourselves take your water strategy and what percentage of the business it is right now? Thank you.
Indra Nooyi
In terms of share gains internationally, I think overall salty snacks globally, I think in 75% of the markets we are holding or gaining share. Remember internationally, we also have a lot of local low cost competitors. In spite of that, I think 70% 75% of markets we hold or gain share, I think in 60% of markets we are gaining share and about 75% we either hold or gain, I am giving you rough numbers, Robert. In terms of beverages again in many of the markets that we participate as PepsiCo about 50% or 60% of markets we are actually holding or gaining share and then the other markets we go in and out, well, one quarter we may gain share, one quarter local competitor or a global competitor may gain share. So we trade shares on a quarterly basis based on what we are lapping or what specific, a blockbuster marketing initiative is being implemented at that time, but overall what we are focused is on an annual basis how do we make sure that we don’t do anything crazy just to gain share. We participate in a very responsible way and somewhere between 60% and 75% of our markets if we can hold or gain share that’s a very sustainable deliberate strategy. And that’s really what we are focused on globally both the snacks and beverages and now more and more in our nutrition businesses, which we are trying to figure out what the relevant marketplaces and how do we calculate a fair market share number. So that’s roughly speaking where we are on share.

Hugh Johnston
On water, Indra just I will finish Robert’s question. It’s about 12% of our volume, Robert, round numbers and in terms of water strategy obviously we have a case pack water business that provides baseload volume and then we are increasingly segmenting that business whether it be with flavored still waters, whether it be with flavored sparkling waters in the form of bubly, whether it be in the form of LIFEWTR, which obviously appeals to a large consumer segment, one, that continues to grow well for us. So I think you will continue to see us segment the water category into profitable niches to go along with the large scale case pack water business.
Operator
Your next question comes from the line of Nik Modi of RBC Capital Markets.
Nik Modi
Yes, good morning everyone. Good morning. So Indra I was hoping you could provide some of the logic behind the various refranchising initiatives PepsiCo has undertaken in the international markets and how any early learnings could inform the beverage strategy in the U.S.? And I guess the main question is, is it even translatable? That would be really helpful to understand.
Indra Nooyi
Nik, I tell you that’s a good question and let me just offer some points. When we re-franchise, it’s usually just to somebody who already has a portfolio of beverages, because Pepsi internationally in many markets, we don’t have a full lineup of beverages, we participate only in a small lineup, we partner with somebody who has their own LRB products and together we cover the entire line. An example would be something like a Postobon in Colombia that has their own line of non-carbs and then we come in with our portfolio and together, we have a fantastic leadership position in Colombia. What we are looking at and Hugh talked about our Czech Republic, Hungary and Slovakia beverage operations, we are refranchising into a partner who already has the lineup of LRB and we complete the portfolio. So our system actually is much more robust than people realize, because as a system we are much stronger than just PepsiCo in the international beverage business and that’s why we feel good about the beverage business. And the early learnings are make sure if you are going to re-franchise, re-franchise to somebody who knows how to run the beverage business and they have a portfolio that together the one plus one is a three not detracting from our own performance. So that’s all we are going to focus on going forward and those are the learnings from our beverage refranchising.
Operator
Your next question comes from the line of Bill Chappell of SunTrust.
Bill Chappell
Thanks. Good morning. Question on just the momentum on NAB that you talked about is it kind of started slow and had good momentum at the end, I mean, that tracks with kind of what we saw in North America weather in terms of cold and wet late March, April early May and then came back roaring and then very hot? So trying to understand what you see that makes you feel that it’s beyond weather, I mean, the whole – lifting the whole category, are you seeing kind of market share especially in CSDs, are you seeing some things stabilize or what gives you so much confidence that carries through as we get to kind of normal weather and albeit easier comps in the back half?
Indra Nooyi
Weather is clearly a factor. I mean, I would be lying if I didn’t tell you that hot weather helps the beverage business, but I think on top of that, our brand health metrics are all trending the right way. The business is trending the right way. And pretty much all of our franchises we are seeing sequential improvement in performance. And so even businesses that have difficult lapse we are seeing sequential improvement in performance. So I think if this continues, this bodes well for NAB.

Indra Nooyi
So thank you all for your questions. Let me summarize, the business overall is performing well in a highly dynamic environment and we remain on-track to deliver our financial goals for the year. We remain highly focused on driving better operating performance from North American Beverages and we are encouraged by the sequential improvement we have seen in NAB. Just as important even if you remain highly focused on performing well in the current and coming quarters, we remain committed to continuing to transform the business to strengthen its sustainability and durability to perform well far into the future. Thank you for joining us this morning and thank you for the confidence you have placed in us with your investment. Thank you.
Operator
Thank you. That does conclude PepsiCo’s second quarter 2018 earnings conference call. You may now disconnect.The Kraft Heinz Co. (NASDAQ:KHC) Q2 2018 Earnings Call August  3, 2018  8:30 AM ET
Executives
Christopher M. Jakubik - The Kraft Heinz Co.
Bernardo Vieira Hees - The Kraft Heinz Co.
David H. Knopf - The Kraft Heinz Co.
Paulo Luiz Araújo Basílio - The Kraft Heinz Co.
Analysts
Andrew Lazar - Barclays Capital, Inc.
Alexia Jane Howard - Sanford C. Bernstein & Co. LLC
Bryan D. Spillane - Bank of America Merrill Lynch
Rob Dickerson - Deutsche Bank Securities, Inc.
Christopher R. Growe - Stifel, Nicolaus & Co., Inc.
Michael S. Lavery - Piper Jaffray & Co.
Jason English - Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC
Scott A. Mushkin - Wolfe Research LLC
David Palmer - RBC Capital Markets LLC
Jonathan Feeney - Consumer Edge Research LLC
Operator
Good day. My name is Daniel, and I will be your operator today. At this time, I would like to welcome everyone to The Kraft Heinz Company's Second Quarter 2018 Earnings Conference Call. As a reminder, this conference call may be recorded.
I will now turn the call over to Chris Jakubik, Head of Global Investor Relations. Mr. Jakubik, you may begin.
Christopher M. Jakubik - The Kraft Heinz Co.
Hello, everyone, and thanks for joining our business update. We'll start today's call with an overview of our second quarter and first-half results as well as an update on our 2018 plan from Bernardo Hees, our CEO; and David Knopf, our Chief Financial Officer. Then, Paulo Basílio, President of our U.S. Zone, will join the rest of us for the Q&A session.
Please note that during our remarks today, we will make some forward-looking statements that are based on how we see things today. Actual results may differ materially due to risks and uncertainties, and these are discussed in our press release and our filings with the SEC. We'll also discuss some non-GAAP financial measures during the call today. These non-GAAP financial measures should not be considered a replacement for and should be read together with GAAP results. And you can find the GAAP to non-GAAP reconciliations within our earnings release and at the end of the slide presentation available on our website.
Now let's turn to slide 2, and I'll hand it over to Bernardo.
Bernardo Vieira Hees - The Kraft Heinz Co.
Thank you, Chris, and good morning, everyone. Similar to our Q1 results, our second quarter results were better than we expected at the time of our last earnings call. The transitory factors that lead us to be cautious on the near-term sales played out much as expected, including the headwinds in the United States from Planters and Ore-Ida and the impact from retail inventory change in Canada.
That said, we delivered slightly better net sales than expected. This was driven by encouraging, ongoing improvement in retail consumption trends in most countries and most categories as well as strong foodservice performance in a number of key countries. At EBITDA, we spoke about near-term pressures in the United States, Canada and Rest of the World from a combination of accelerated commercial investment, significant cost inflation, especially freight, as well as strong comparisons with the prior year in every region.
Still, we delivered stronger-than-expected EBITDA from solid productivity gains in EMEA as well as better growth in certain Rest of the World markets. In addition, and perhaps even more important, we continued to make progress in building the capabilities and putting in place the go-to-market plans that we expect will generate top line growth going forward.
Many of you have asked why we are so confident in our ability to deliver the top line and what specifically will drive it. So on the slide 3, we have laid out many of the key initiatives we expect will help us build momentum into the second half by region, by brand. In the United States, we saw consumption trends improve as Q2 unfolded, and as Planters' Club comparisons fade and as Ore-Ida and cold cuts activity and distribution improves, we're targeting top line growth in the third quarter. Our focus is on incremental volumes and mix improvements coming from new products like Lunchables, Around the World Flavorings, Oscar Mayer Plates, Just Crack an Egg, Heinz Real Mayonnaise as well as Planters where we brought back consumers' favorites, CHEEZ BALLS and CHEEZ CURLS for a limited time.

In addition, we are planning stronger in-store activity as we move forward, including back-to-school, behind main-stays like Oscar Mayer, Kraft cheese, Lunchables and Capri Sun, as well as continuing Philadelphia's growth with strong holiday programs. In Canada, while the impact of tariffs on sales is still largely unknown, we continue to feel good about getting Canada back to growth track by year-end. This should come on building on the good performance we are seeing in coffee products, frozen meals and Natural Cheese Slice innovation as well as stronger merchandising behind Cracker Barrel Cheese.
In EMEA, we are looking to sustain the momentum we have seen from the positive consumption tailwinds that have been driving performance to-date, including those coming from newly-repatriated Kraft and Bull's-Eye brands. In the second half, we also see opportunities for improvement for both whitespace and innovation initiatives, including Heinz in Middle East, Africa and Eastern Europe, the recent launch of Bull's-Eye Barbecue in the UK and Plasmon Infant Biscuits in Italy.
And in our Rest of the World market, at some of – the short-term headwinds we recently experienced has started to fade. We expect some drivers to show towards a stronger way in the second half. These include: the strong growth and turnaround of Complan in India; the repatriation of the Kraft brands and our Cerebos acquisition in Australia/New Zealand; Heinz condiments in Brazil and Mexico; Kraft Mayo in Brazil; and sauces whitespace expansion in Central America and the Southern Cone.
Outside of traditional retail, I also add that we have innovation distribution and assortment initiatives underway in Foodservice to drive substantial incremental gains in each region, as well as in the e-commerce channel where, in the United States alone, we're up more than 75% in both Q2 and through the first half. And our online portfolio is now over index market share, versus traditional retail channels.
In total, this is by far the strongest innovation pipeline we have had in place in our short history as Kraft Heinz. At the same time, and something we have been talking about are the commercial investments and capabilities to play more offense. It gives us further confidence in our ability to change trajectory in both distribution and consumption, especially behind innovation.
On slide 4, we show again the six goals from the framework we introduced early this year. During the second quarter and into the second half of 2018, we continue to make strides in each area. I just talked about our brand-building initiatives. Pushing into new categories, new segments, new occasions and doing this with a focus on incrementality, not just gross sales from new items. We will strongly support this, for instance, through data-driven marketing, where we are putting our in-house tools to work to drill deeper into the quality impressions. We are concentrating on building even more native impressions or impressions that are created by being part of the conversations of consumers' everyday lives and earned impressions, where you can create the news and share it through media coverage.
For those of you in the United States, you have seen this at work with our Heinz Mayochup and Country Time by Legal-Ade campaigns, helping to drive improving consumption trends. Year-to-date, we estimate that native and earnings PR impressions we have generated in the United States alone is greater than all of 2017 and double what we generated in full-year 2016. And we have more coming to support our second-half initiatives. In both category management and go-to-market capabilities, we now have more capacity to drive category and brand growth, as our product pipeline will be fully in place in Q3.

In category management, while we have significant potential still ahead, there are key areas of improvement we can leverage right now. At retail in the United States, for instance, our efforts have been targeted at improving SKU adoption, distribution velocities through assortment management and planograms. And in Canada, our in-house tools and disciplined rituals and routines are in place to help set pricing guidelines and guardrails as well as conduct pre-and post-event analysis, all aimed to make more informal decisions and improve returns.
In go-to-market capabilities, the next wave of our in-house in-store sales teams is now in place in the United States, on track to more than double by the end of the year. With that, we believe that we now have critical mass to see a measurable impact on feature and display conversion, out-of-stocks and planogram compliance, just as we ramp up our second half sales plan.
When our capability and product news (10:31) come together, we see measurable, incremental and sustainable gains. We see Oscar Mayer Hot Dogs increase households' penetration and velocity, grow dollar sales and gain share. This is happening now behind our For the Love of Hot Dogs campaign and a step-up in store activity at Memorial Day and Fourth of July.
We see successful breakthrough innovation like our Just Crack an Egg platform. Just over six months in the market launch velocities roughly two times our estimates, top quartile trial and repeat, improving to be a successful bridge between convenient and freshness.
And internationally, when our marketing, category management and go-to-market capability come together, we hit the ground running with newly repatriated and acquired brands like Bull's-Eye and Kraft in Europe and Cerebos in Australia and New Zealand, both are performing ahead of plan.
Finally, the backbone of everything we do, operations, people and corporate social responsibility are fully aligned and even more capable to execute our plans. In operations, we continue to deliver against aggressive industry-leading targets in quality, safety and customer service in nearly all geographies we operate. Customer service in particular had been an area of significant focus and investment and we have made significant improvements in the United States and Canada.
And in people, during Q2, we leveraged our Marketing Playbook and Category Marketing programs to close any gaps in best-in-class skills and capabilities and further deploy our new in-house tools. And on the CSR front, early this week, we expanded our environmental commitments. We aim to deliver a 100% recyclable, reusable or compostable packaging by 2025. And we are doing our part to accelerate the transition to a low-carbon economy by joining the Science Based Targets Initiative and working to set science-based carbon reduction goals.
So to summarize, our first half results came in better than expected. Our second half commercial plans are the most robust since the 2015 merger and now it's up to us to execute with excellency.
I will now hand it over to David to provide more color on our Q2 results and how our plans for the second half are likely to play out in our financial results going forward.
David H. Knopf - The Kraft Heinz Co.
Thank you, Bernardo, and hello, everyone. Turning to our results on slide 5, total company organic net sales were down 40 basis points in Q2, sequentially better than Q1 and, as Bernardo said, somewhat better than what we expected at the time of our last call. Pricing was positive for the fourth consecutive quarter, up 1.3 percentage points in Q2 and 1.1 percentage points in the first half.
In both periods, this was driven by a combination of pricing to offset local input costs in Rest of World markets and carryover pricing in both the U.S. and Canada that more than offset stepped up in-store and new product activity in EMEA. Volume mix was 1.7 percentage points lower in Q2 and two points lower for the first half due to known headwinds in the United States and Canada that overshadowed strong growth in EMEA.

By segment, the U.S. was slightly better than our initial expectations. As expected, Planters and Ore-Ida had a negative impact of approximately 1.5%, and the combination of trade spend timing and Easter shift was roughly one point of headwind to Q2 net sales. Excluding these factors, underlying U.S. consumption again exceeded reported results and showed a slight sequential improvement from Q1. And I would add that consumption has continued to improve based on the data we've seen so far for July.
In Canada, results reflected the anticipated combination of comparisons with prior year promotional activity that was not repeated primarily in condiments and sauces, as well as trade inventory adjustments and select product discontinuations. EMEA had another strong quarter driven by strong condiments and sauces' growth across the zone, including solid consumption gains for both the Kraft and Bull's-Eye brands. Strong gains in Foodservice in every region are also contributing to EMEA growth.
And in Rest of World, while top line growth was supported by pricing, another quarter of strong vol mix gains in condiments and sauces across the majority of regions and strong growth of Complan in India were again held back by one-off factors. In Q2, this included lower sales of canned seafood in Indonesia and the truckers strike in Brazil. That said, we do expect sequential improvement in Rest of World moving forward.
At EBITDA, Q2 performance was slightly better than expected, although the drivers were consistent with our expectations. Specifically, we had solid gains from productivity savings and net pricing; gains that were offset by inflationary pressures, primarily elevated freight and resin costs; as well as costs associated with our aggressive commercial investment agenda. And in adjusted EPS, we were up $0.02 versus Q2 last year, driven primarily by a roughly 720-basis-point reduction in the tax rate on adjusted earnings.
Overall, our first half financial performance was consistent with the type of start to the year we expected, if not somewhat better than expected at the profit line, and provides a solid base from which to build, which brings us to our outlook on slide 6. As Bernardo outlined, we believe things are in place for us to push a more aggressive growth agenda in the second half from a strong innovation pipeline, distribution gains across channels, as well as expanding our brands into geographic whitespace.
Despite the slow start with several transitory headwinds and recent key commodity weakness in the U.S., we believe we're in a strong position to deliver organic growth for the full year, and therefore, we continue to expect that 2018 will be a year where the first half second half balance of net sales will be skewed to the second half. Our organic net sales growth is expected to begin now in Q3 with the U.S. growing and EMEA and Rest of World sustaining momentum. In Canada, with near-term risks at play, it may be Q4 until we see the turn.
To support this growth and given our confidence in the pipeline of activities that Bernardo described, we're planning our commercial investments to be at the high-end of the $250 million to $300 million range we previously discussed, mainly in the form of more working media dollars. At the same time, we think it's appropriate to be more conservative in the near-term with expectations around adjusted EBITDA. And instead of the second half skew that we previously talked about, we now expect more of a 50-50 split to the year. This is driven by three factors.
One is that we will be at the high-end of our planned commercial investments that I just mentioned. Two is our stronger-than-expected first half delivery. And three is cost inflation, where a number of areas have stayed higher for longer than we anticipated, mainly in freight and transportation; packaging, both resins and cardboard; as well as tariff risk currently impacting foil and aluminum costs in the U.S. and certain products we sell in Canada.

Net-net, our savings curve will take more time to overcome the incremental cost inflation we expect during the remainder of 2018. So, as we assess Q3 prospects, the combination of greater-than-expected inflation, a more aggressive investment posture and difficult comparisons on variable compensation versus last year will mean that Q3 adjusted EBITDA dollars are likely to be down a greater order of magnitude than what we saw in the first half of the year. That said, we do expect our constant currency adjusted EBITDA trend to improve by year-end and gain further momentum into 2019 with productivity net of cost inflation accelerating, while the recovery in top line momentum continues.
Below the line, we are still targeting adjusted EPS growth and strong cash generation in 2018. This should be aided by tax favorability where we now can expect an effective tax rate of approximately 21% for the full year in 2018. I will also note that based on successful recent refinancing activity, we now expect incremental interest expense in 2018 of roughly $80 million versus the $100 million we previously outlined. And in terms of cash generation, we continue to expect a significant step-up in 2018, despite a near-term headwind to working capital from recent termination of our accounts receivable securitization and factoring program in the U.S.
To close, I think it's worth repeating the thoughts that we've expressed all year: that we're developing capabilities to create brand and category advantage to achieve profitable growth; that we're investing aggressively now in order to see benefits sooner; and that these factors will shape our near-term results in 2018, and will drive sustainable profitable growth into 2019 and beyond.
Now, we'd be happy to take your questions.
Question-and-Answer Session
Operator
Thank you. Our first question comes from Andrew Lazar with Barclays. Your line is now open.
Andrew Lazar - Barclays Capital, Inc.
Good morning, everybody.
Bernardo Vieira Hees - The Kraft Heinz Co.
Good morning.
David H. Knopf - The Kraft Heinz Co.
Good morning.
Andrew Lazar - Barclays Capital, Inc.
I guess I'll kick it off with, with all of the investments in capabilities that you've been making recently, and clearly some of the renewed confidence in the organic top line growth starting as of Q3, I guess, do you feel as though this makes Kraft Heinz more willing to perhaps consider assets that may require a bit more heavy lifting rather than ones that already have better growth prospects, but would certainly come at higher multiples?
Bernardo Vieira Hees - The Kraft Heinz Co.
Hi, Andrew. This is Bernardo. Good morning.
Andrew Lazar - Barclays Capital, Inc.
Good morning.
Bernardo Vieira Hees - The Kraft Heinz Co.
Well, let me start with the investment part of your question. We're happy that we accelerated the investments we announced at the beginning of the year, creating the capabilities that I really believe are going to stay here. You're going to start seeing the second half of this year, but are going to stay with us in 2019 and beyond, right, behind go-to-market sales teams, channels, activations, innovation, marketing dollars and so on. We always said that was one investment that we would see results in the year to come. So, we're happy with the program. And as we always said as well, we wouldn't hesitate to sacrifice a point of margin to generate accelerated growth on the top line.
With that in mind, your question is given the capability we're building, now how this plays on M&A or more organic plans for the company, right? What I can say about that is pretty much what we have been saying and have been consistent for quite some time. Our framework has really not changed, right. The fact that we like big brands, the fact that we like business that can travel and international, the fact that we do like to take synergies from existing business and to reinvest behind brands, behind products and behind people. I don't think that this framework change because of the capabilities we're developing.

Why I can say that with the experience we have today after being – since Heinz 2013 – five years into the industry, the knowledge on the category, the knowledge of the things that do work and things that you have seen that do not work, and so on, allows us to be much more confident where to put the money, what assets can be turned around, and things that can really be within this framework. And also true to the fact that our ability to integrate and to connect companies for a bigger scale and so on, given that you have been doing that for quite some time. And every time we have been doing better, got faster and we have a better understanding.
To your question about assets, slower growth, or higher growth, and so on, I don't think that changed with what we have in mind from a framework standpoint.
Andrew Lazar - Barclays Capital, Inc.
Great. Thanks very much.
Operator
Thank you. And our next question comes from Alexia Howard with Bernstein. Your line is now open.
Alexia Jane Howard - Sanford C. Bernstein & Co. LLC
Good morning, everyone.
Paulo Luiz Araújo Basílio - The Kraft Heinz Co.
Good morning.
David H. Knopf - The Kraft Heinz Co.
Good morning.
Alexia Jane Howard - Sanford C. Bernstein & Co. LLC
Can I ask about the pricing environments in North America? It seems as though it's been pretty challenging for the last 18 months or so. You've obviously got some positive pricing that's running through now. How do you expect that to play out in the second half? And just how do you see the environment and the retailers' relationships playing out from here on out?
Paulo Luiz Araújo Basílio - The Kraft Heinz Co.
Hi, Alexia. This is Paulo. So again, we believe that we have strong brands. We have differentiated products. We have a strong innovation pipeline and so far we've been able to drive our brands and products in line with what we perceive to be the value to the consumer, so. But we always keep in mind it's very important to us to strike the right balance between market share, distribution and profitable volume. So this balance will play very differently in each category that we play. So today, I can say that the relationship we have with customers are going very well and a very clear connection with all of them.
Alexia Jane Howard - Sanford C. Bernstein & Co. LLC
And so, do you expect the pricing to strengthen as we get into the back half? Or the price mix to improve?
Paulo Luiz Araújo Basílio - The Kraft Heinz Co.
Alexia, as a matter of practice, we don't forecast pricing for the future. But what we can say there, the growth that we expect to have in the second half is going to be more balanced to volume mix.
Alexia Jane Howard - Sanford C. Bernstein & Co. LLC
Thank you very much. I'll pass it on.
Operator
Thank you. And our next question comes from Bryan Spillane with Bank of America. Your line is now open.
Bryan D. Spillane - Bank of America Merrill Lynch
Hey. Good morning, everyone.
Paulo Luiz Araújo Basílio - The Kraft Heinz Co.
Good morning.
Bryan D. Spillane - Bank of America Merrill Lynch
Just two questions related to the investment in capabilities, the P&L investment this year. I think if I remember it correctly, you're spending about $300 million, P&L dollars against it. And I guess, two things. One, is this sort of an ongoing expense, meaning will it be an incremental headwind again as we kind of move into the future? Or is it sort of a one-year step-up? And then second, if you could talk a little bit about how those investments specifically would help you. Or do they at all improve your ability to integrate acquisitions? So like the difference between integrating without these capabilities versus what it was before.
Bernardo Vieira Hees - The Kraft Heinz Co.
Thanks, Bryan. It's Bernardo. The investments were announced. What really scaled up was a one-off, the $300 million that you want to accelerate the capability to have in the company in go-to-market, channel activation, in innovation launch platforms, and service levels with specific investments directed to specific customers especially in the United States. So that, I would say, is coming really well, creating the capability the company has for the future, not only we expect to see that already has some results in the second half of the year, but 2019 and beyond. That is, like we said before, a step-up as a one-off. Okay?

Related to the second part of your question about the capabilities of integrating faster in an M&A environment, how this would happen, those capabilities will help us. I think, like I said, at the first question, the learning and the experience we have today allowed us to have very knowledge on each one of the categories and those capabilities are created when you think about revenue management, assortment management, planogram, go-to-market, breakthrough innovation, channel mix, activation in e-commerce, Foodservice, clubs, drugstores, all these kinds of capabilities, they are scalable in an organic environment.
Bryan D. Spillane - Bank of America Merrill Lynch
If I could just follow up, David, is it still $300 million that you're spending back this year?
David H. Knopf - The Kraft Heinz Co.
Hi, Bryan. This is David. That's correct. We talked about at the beginning of the year, commercial investments and investments in service between $250 million to $300 million, so now we expect to be on the high end of that at closer to $300 million.
Bryan D. Spillane - Bank of America Merrill Lynch
All right. So if we're thinking about the EBITDA guide for the year even though you're having to have faced some inflation, you chose to actually spend at a high-end of the investment either way. Because of it, it's going to make sense longer-term?
David H. Knopf - The Kraft Heinz Co.
Yes, that's correct.
Bryan D. Spillane - Bank of America Merrill Lynch
All right. Thank you.
Operator
Thank you. And our next question comes from Rob Dickerson with Deutsche Bank. Your line is now open.
Rob Dickerson - Deutsche Bank Securities, Inc.
Thank you. Good morning. Two quick questions, I guess, the first question just in cadence for the rest of the year, Q3 versus Q4. In terms of what you said about Q3 that Q3 EBITDA would be down slightly more than it was down in the first half of the year, and then we should see a pick back up in Q4, just relative to internal forecast originally from the beginning of the year, is there a change to the full year just to be clear? Or is it – so some came in a little bit better in the first half and really in Q2, but then it will be a little bit worse in Q3? Or how should we think about kind of where you are right now and how you view the full year versus where you viewed the full year at the end of 2017? That's it.
David H. Knopf - The Kraft Heinz Co.
Sure. Hi, Rob. This is David. Thanks for the question. So in terms of the second half cadence, so I'll start with Q3. So, our profitability in the quarter in Q3 versus last year is going to be driven by three factors. So first, we expect that the swing from overhead favorability we mentioned last year to a more normal incentive compensation accrual this year to be roughly $75 million to $100 million in the quarter.
Second, as noted, we plan to be at the high-end of our commercial investments for the year. So again, the high end of the range of the $250 million to $300 million I mentioned and this is to support our second half growth initiatives more strongly.
And third is the fact that the additional inflation we noted is running ahead of our savings curve in the short-term. So those are really the three factors in Q3 that are going to drive that trend.
Going forward in Q4 we expect our comparisons to ease and our savings curve to accelerate, although we think it's best to maintain a conservative set of expectations with regard to cost inflation. So that's why we think the year is going to look a little bit more balanced versus what we talked about earlier in the year.
Rob Dickerson - Deutsche Bank Securities, Inc.
Okay. Great. And then just quickly on tariffs, I think I heard you call out a few inflationary aspects of tariff effects on specific commodities. Is there some potential risk though in terms of volumes do you foresee? And just very general, it's just a very general question.

David H. Knopf - The Kraft Heinz Co.
Yes. So in terms of tariffs, I think the point that I want to get across is given what we're seeing we want to be conservative and that drives our kind of outlook for the year. But these types of things, we're not exactly sure what will stick and for how long. So we're not going to take a stance yet on potential actions that we can take to offset those things, so I'm not going to talk about that now but I think given those factors and some of the cost inflation we're seeing in the market, again, we're going to have this kind of more conservative stance on the year.
Rob Dickerson - Deutsche Bank Securities, Inc.
Super. Thank you so much.
Operator
Thank you. And our next question comes from Chris Growe with Stifel. Your line is now open.
Christopher R. Growe - Stifel, Nicolaus & Co., Inc.
Hi. Good morning.
David H. Knopf - The Kraft Heinz Co.
Good morning
Paulo Luiz Araújo Basílio - The Kraft Heinz Co.
Good morning.
Christopher R. Growe - Stifel, Nicolaus & Co., Inc.
Hi. I just had two quick questions for you. I wanted to ask first of all, if you look at this quarter, if you think of like the old PNOC, pricing net of commodity inflation, is that positive or negative in the quarter here such that are you getting pricing through given this accelerated rate of non-commodity inflation? That's my first question.
David H. Knopf - The Kraft Heinz Co.
Sure. Hi, Chris. This is David. So I won't talk specifically on the quarter but I'd say overall for the year we continue to expect pricing relative to our key commodities to be stable. We have recently seen some key commodities come down more recently and expect that for the year. But as a matter of practice, we're not going to discuss potential future pricing actions relative to that. But as Paulo said earlier, we're confident in the strength of our brands and will continue to strike a balance between market share distribution and profitable volume as it relates to commodities.
Christopher R. Growe - Stifel, Nicolaus & Co., Inc.
And so just to be clear, does non-key commodity inflation come into your thinking as you're approaching pricing? Not that you're going to tell me what you're going to do, but is that a factor you'd consider in terms of your pricing? Or (35:30) offset with cost savings?
David H. Knopf - The Kraft Heinz Co.
Yes. So it's certainly part of the equation there. We're not going to provide color on pricing going forward. But between commodities, non-key commodity inflation, we think in terms of pricing and potential productivity initiatives to offset that.
Christopher R. Growe - Stifel, Nicolaus & Co., Inc.
Okay. And I had just one question as well. You've had some weight on your sales from Planters and Oscar Mayer and Ore-Ida. I think you approached much easier comparisons on that front in the second half of the year. Is that right? You get past a lot of those issues in the second half? And do those shift to growth in the second half of the year as a result of that?
Paulo Luiz Araújo Basílio - The Kraft Heinz Co.
Hi, Chris. This is Paulo. I think that is one of the components, as we said. We are confident that we're expecting sales to grow in U.S. in the second half. I think one component that we are seeing is that you can see that our categories are improving, our categories now are growing. And on top of that, the big headwinds in share that you were seeing, these negative headwinds, we expect them to fade. I can give examples of cold cuts, Ore-Ida, lost distribution that we have, the capacity restrictions we had. Now we have the capacity in place, so we expect to recover the distribution.
I can also say that on top of that, we're going to see our – we have a strong innovation pipeline coming to the market that's already distributed – and also a much better and stronger program driving improvement in consumption. So pretty much this is the main pillars to support our expectations for growth in the second half.

Christopher R. Growe - Stifel, Nicolaus & Co., Inc.
Okay. Thank you very much.
David H. Knopf - The Kraft Heinz Co.
You're welcome.
Operator
Thank you. And our next question comes from Michael Lavery with Piper Jaffray. Your line is now open.
Michael S. Lavery - Piper Jaffray & Co.
Thank you. Good morning.
David H. Knopf - The Kraft Heinz Co.
Good Morning.
Paulo Luiz Araújo Basílio - The Kraft Heinz Co.
Good morning.
Michael S. Lavery - Piper Jaffray & Co.
Two quick ones. You mentioned food service a couple times and I was wondering if you could just elaborate a little bit on some of your initiatives there and what the opportunities are? And how much is it white space driven that you're filling in gaps? And then just second, following up on Andrew's question a little bit, how do you handicap the ability of a brand to travel? And how do you think about that when you are evaluating inorganic growth?
Bernardo Vieira Hees - The Kraft Heinz Co.
Hi, Michael. It's Bernardo. With respect to food service, it has been actually a white space opportunity worldwide, not only here in the United States, that you have been growing now for the second year in a row. But worldwide has been double-digits growth, in Europe. We have seen many countries in Asia that have been experiencing growth in food service. Remember, we're building a factory in countryside at Brazil in the state of Goiás that there is a significant volume related to food service. So it has been a strategic decision from the company to create capabilities in different zones and countries to push this.
We do believe our products resonate in a big way. There are some adaptations, and I think we're getting better as a company to create the right packaging and the right product assortment to understand the dynamics of this channel that are different than normal retail channel. So that has been something that has been improving in the company. We do expect that to continue in the years to come. And do expect us to get better and to be stronger in the food service channel than we've ever been, again, not only in the United States that has been more a reality for some time but other parts of the world.
The second part of your question about the capabilities and how to evaluate from an M&A standpoint, remember, we are seeing that and we are doing that, taking brands from existing countries and making them on a global or a zoned stage now for some time, right? We had the repatriation of Kraft this year in Europe and Australia. I think a good example that is unfolding as we speak is the launch of BULL'S-EYE barbecue and premium sauces in UK and Continental Europe. And we're seeing Kraft being deployed now in Latin America; being launched in Brazil. It's being launched in many countries in Asia. We are seeing Planters being deployed in UK, Continental Europe, China and other countries. So we have been doing that.
I don't think – and understanding the category and having a stronger brand that resonates sometimes in a country like America. In the case of BULL'S-EYE, it was very strong in Germany, and now we are making in different countries in Europe, but understanding the strength of the brand, what is the category drivers and what consumers want, I think the connection is quite there. As we evaluate new brands on the organic, for sure always there are risks. But I would say our experience today allows us to be more assertive about it.
Michael S. Lavery - Piper Jaffray & Co.
That's great. Thank you very much.
Operator
Thank you. And our next question comes from Jason English with Goldman Sachs. Your line is now open.
Jason English - Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC
Hey. Good morning, folks. Thank you for the question.
David H. Knopf - The Kraft Heinz Co.
Good morning.
Jason English - Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC

A quick question for clarification. Did I hear you right that you're now expecting EBITDA to be about a 50-50 split, front-half, back-half?
David H. Knopf - The Kraft Heinz Co.
Hi, Jason. This is David. That's right. We expect it to be a little bit more balanced, 50-50 for the year.
Jason English - Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC
That implies that EBITDA, if we just kind of track with the first half, would be down year-on-year by a bit over $200 million. Last quarter, you guys guided for organic EBITDA growth, and you mentioned that first half is exceeding expectations. I'm kind of interpreting this to mean that you're lowering your full year EBITDA guidance by about $300 million. Is that wrong?
And given that you've over delivered, it's really all coming in the back half. I know you've got some cost creep with some items, but you also mentioned some of your key commodities trending down. What am I missing to bridge that all the way to that $300-ish sort of million dollar difference?
David H. Knopf - The Kraft Heinz Co.
Sure, Jason. This is David. So let me walk you through kind of the cadence of what we're seeing for the rest of the year. So we continue to have good visibility on significant productivity and cost savings initiatives for the remainder of the year and going into 2019 as well.
That said, as I talked about, we're seeing additional cost inflation that in the immediate term is outpacing the savings curve, and it's just kind of two factors. So first, we have some costs that are staying higher for longer, and in some cases like freight, they're continuing to climb this year. And then second, as I talked about, we had some headwinds from tariffs as well, of which we're not exactly sure what will stick or for how long. But for those reasons, we think it's better to take a more conservative stance.
At the same time, we have an opportunity to drive sustainable consumption gains from investments that Bernardo mentioned in our commercial pipeline. So again, we think it's best to kind of head into the second half with a more conservative set of expectations around near-term EBITDA dollars, especially for Q3, as I mentioned, and continue to focus on the sustainable top- and bottom-line growth going forward.
Jason English - Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC
Okay. Thank you. I'll pass it on.
David H. Knopf - The Kraft Heinz Co.
Thanks.
Operator
Thank you. Our next question comes from Scott Mushkin with Wolfe Research. Your line is now open.
Scott A. Mushkin - Wolfe Research LLC
Thanks, guys, for the (44:23) questions. So I wanted to go back to the M&A. A question I get a lot is why hasn't something happened? Obviously, we know that you guys have been out there trying to, you know, looking at different assets. I guess I wanted to take a step back and understand what you're saying, your take on the landscape both M&A clearly does matter a lot, especially with Walmart in the North American market, Walmart taking as much volume share as they are, it'd be nice to have the CPG companies consolidate a little bit more aggressively especially you guys and I'm wondering if you think there's some structural impediments to that?
Bernardo Vieira Hees - The Kraft Heinz Co.
Hi. Here's Bernardo. If I understood correct the question about there is something structure that would be in the middle of more consolidation and M&A in the industry, right? And then you relate to the Walmart example. We really don't see that way. I think the food industry is an industry that has not consolidated with the same speed as other industry. There are some reasons for that given local pace and regulations and other things, but not to the extent we have seen it. So we do believe looking mid or long-term that there will be more consolidation in the industry and we have not shying to say that we want to be a force behind this when the process happens, right?

To your point about structural obstacles and so on, we don't see really any in that sense. I think again it's important in our case to be very disciplined on our approach and our framework like that has not changed. We are disciplined on price to the value creation equation. I think we have proved that over time and that's something we believe is important for the long-term value creation equation, okay? And I think also important to say, we don't do something to be happy for a quarter and then be regretting for the long-term to be apologizing for the next couple of years. When it move, we definitely move with a much longer-term view believing that something is going to make the company stronger for the years to come.
Scott A. Mushkin - Wolfe Research LLC
Okay. So, I appreciate the answer. My follow-up question is, it just seems that and what the answers have been around pricing in kind of the back half of the year, I mean, my interpretation it's just hard to get price through. I mean, you talk about cost inflation and not being able to be offset by the underlying savings, but that's my interpretation of what you guys have been saying. Is that interpretation incorrect? And I'll yield. Thanks.
Paulo Luiz Araújo Basílio - The Kraft Heinz Co.
Hi. This is Paulo. No. I think that is a balance. It's always a balance as we've been discussing. Again, we've been able to price our brands so far but the way that we approach this is not to price to offset a specific cost. It's really to find and to strike the right balance between a profitable volume, distribution, and share. So that's our approach. At the end of the day, profitability is one of the components. It's not the only one. We see the bid is more – as what's the position that we're going to take that's going to be healthier for the business looking to this three components that we shared. But so far as we said, we've been able to price our booked volume (48:45) in line with the value that we have, that our products have for the consumer, so.
Scott A. Mushkin - Wolfe Research LLC
Thanks, guys.
Bernardo Vieira Hees - The Kraft Heinz Co.
Welcome.
Paulo Luiz Araújo Basílio - The Kraft Heinz Co.
Thanks.
Operator
Thank you. And our next question comes from David Palmer with RBC. Your line is now open.
David Palmer - RBC Capital Markets LLC
Good morning, everyone. You've listed a lot of reasons why sales were constrained in the first half in emerging markets, U.S., Canada, and separately you highlighted the analytics and sales investments. And to those two buckets I would add that in some key commodity categories like cheese, you've had some big volume declines. So I guess what I'm wondering is, going into the second half of the year, could you give some color about the reasons and timing for the sales recovery? Where will you see the sales improve earlier and where later? Thanks.
Paulo Luiz Araújo Basílio - The Kraft Heinz Co.
Hi. This is Paulo. I'm going to speak for the last year. Pretty much the components are the ones we were sharing. So first of all, we are seeing our categories improving, so our categories are running positive today. Many negative shares that we saw in the first half of the year are fading. We have in the innovation pipeline coming and again when you see what is giving us confidence on that in the U.S. is that when you see the consumption of figures that we have for July, these already happened. We are already trading positive consumption in the month in July. So it's pretty much just the combination of improvement in the categories, the negative headwinds that we have fading, investment in innovation and better programming that is giving us this confidence by the second half.
Bernardo Vieira Hees - The Kraft Heinz Co.
And, David, from a worldwide standpoint, we have Europe, Middle East and Africa continuing to grow with the same momentum they have in the first half of the year. We do see acceleration in Latin America especially after the strike event in Brazil in May, in June, July and moving forward we do see acceleration in some countries in Asia where you have the one-offs with the problems with fish supply in Indonesia and some inventory timing in China behind us. And we do you see a barrier sequentially performance in Canada, right, given the level of activation and innovation coming to market in the second half of the year in the country. With this picture, together what Paulo just mentioned in the United States, we feel confident about the acceleration and the connection between the investment we announced in the beginning of the year and the results you're going to see in the top-line in the second half of the year, Q3, Q4 going into first half 2019.

David Palmer - RBC Capital Markets LLC
Thank you.
Christopher M. Jakubik - The Kraft Heinz Co.
Great. If we could take maybe one more question.
Operator
Thank you. And our final question comes from Jonathan Feeney with Consumer Edge. Your line is now open.
Jonathan Feeney - Consumer Edge Research LLC
Thank you very much for the question. I guess a little bit of a follow-up, Bernardo, you talked about to Jason English's question, when you think about – you talked about capabilities investments, and for a company that's been very, very return-focused and very successful doing so, I'm just wondering how much of these capabilities investments have a return that we can measure in 2019, 2020? And if you could, I know you don't guide for 2019 or necessarily a long-term basis, but these investments you're talking about, are these really just increases in the cost of competition versus what you might have thought on January 1? Or would you really see that maybe versus where we were thinking January 1 it's just a question of maybe profits being pushed forward into 2019 and subsequent years from these investments relative to your expectations? Thank you.
Bernardo Vieira Hees - The Kraft Heinz Co.
Hi Jon. The way we see that and if you think about what we did, was not really a change on the plans we had. We knew the capabilities were there and we knew what to do. We took advantage of a better scenario we had in the United States from a free cash flow standpoint and we did accelerate the plans we had from a commercial standpoint to drive those capabilities, right? So it's not something that was new to us but the acceleration given the numbers we have been seeing in the pilots we run in 2016, 2017, allowed us to be confident about where we are deploying the capital, right?
And the reason you're going to see that is because a lot of the innovation that's coming to market, Just Crack an Egg, we started in 2016, right? Planters Crunchers, Heinz Real Mayo, Capri Sun natural, Capri Sun zero sugar, pasta sauce, Heinz in Continental Europe, BULL'S-EYE in Continental Europe, Heinz and Kraft Mayo in Southern Cone and Brazil in Latin America, right? The expansion of two biscuit category and nuts category in China, right. All those things we're having time and have been developed but with the acceleration of those capabilities, understanding the category, connecting to our field teams in some countries that we wanted to expand, getting our channels right and so on, would allow us to be in a position not only in the second half but looking at 2019 and 2020 in a better way. That's what I'm saying, that's a one-off to enhance our capabilities and then we come back to a normal plan.
So looking 2019 and 2020 you're probably going to go back to match our returns in a normal year plan, what's the return given my results on net sales, my results on profitability, and so on. We continue to be very focused in value creation, right? That's us. We're a performance-driven company and we are very pleased with the culture and with the way it is progressing the morale, the way we're seeing the second half of the year, the way our employees that's really the competitive advantage of the company is really engaging with the plans we have for the short-term in the second half 2018 but looking into 2019 and beyond. So we do believe there is a return for that and that's why we're confident in the investment we're making.
Jonathan Feeney - Consumer Edge Research LLC
Understood. Thank you very much.
Operator
Thank you. Ladies and gentlemen, that concludes our question-and-answer session for today's call. I would now like to turn the call back over to Chris Jakubik for any further remarks.
Christopher M. Jakubik - The Kraft Heinz Co.
Thanks for joining us everyone this morning. For those analysts who have follow-up questions, Andy Larkin and I will be available for your follow ups. And for those in the media that have questions, Michael Mullen will be available for you as well. So thanks again for joining us, and have a great day.

Operator
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for participating in today's conference. This does conclude today's program, and you may all disconnect. Everyone, have a wonderful day.Facebook, Inc. (NASDAQ:FB) Q2 2018 Earnings Call July 25, 2018  5:00 PM ET
Executives
Deborah Crawford - Facebook, Inc.
Mark Elliot Zuckerberg - Facebook, Inc.
Sheryl Kara Sandberg - Facebook, Inc.
David M. Wehner - Facebook, Inc.
Analysts
Brian Nowak - Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC
Eric J. Sheridan - UBS Securities LLC
Ross Sandler - Barclays Capital, Inc.
Douglas T. Anmuth - JPMorgan Securities LLC
Heather Bellini - Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC
Mark Mahaney - RBC Capital Markets LLC
John Blackledge - Cowen & Co. LLC
Justin Post - Bank of America/Merrill Lynch
Mark A. May - Citigroup Global Markets, Inc.
Richard Greenfield - BTIG LLC
Anthony DiClemente - Evercore Group LLC
Peter C. Stabler - Wells Fargo Securities LLC
Brent Thill - Jefferies LLC
Colin Alan Sebastian - Robert W. Baird & Co., Inc.
Operator
Good afternoon. My name is Mike, and I will be your conference operator today. At this time, I would like to welcome everyone to the Facebook Second Quarter 2018 Earnings Call. All lines have been placed on mute to prevent any background noise. After the speakers' remarks, there will be a question-and-answer session.
This call will be recorded. Thank you very much. Ms. Deborah Crawford, Facebook's Vice President of Investor Relations, you may begin.
Deborah Crawford - Facebook, Inc.
Thank you. Good afternoon and welcome to Facebook second quarter 2018 earnings conference call. Joining me today to discuss our results are Mark Zuckerberg, CEO; Sheryl Sandberg, COO; and Dave Wehner, CFO.
Before we get started, I would like to take this opportunity to remind you that our remarks today will include forward-looking statements. Actual results may differ materially from those contemplated by these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause these results to differ materially are set forth in today's press release and in our Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed with the SEC.
Any forward-looking statements that we make on this call are based on assumptions as of today, and we undertake no obligation to update these statements as a result of new information or future events. During this call, we may present both GAAP and non-GAAP financial measures. A reconciliation of GAAP to non-GAAP measures is included in today's earnings press release. The press release and an accompanying investor presentation are available on our website at investor.fb.com.
And now, I'd like to turn the call over to Mark.
Mark Elliot Zuckerberg - Facebook, Inc.
Thanks, Deborah, and thanks, everyone, for joining us today. We had another solid quarter. Revenue grew 42% year-over-year to $13.2 billion. And Facebook now has more than 2.2 billion monthly active with almost 1.5 billion actives using it every day.
For the first time today, we're also releasing how many people use at least one of our apps, Facebook, WhatsApp, Instagram or Messenger, and that's 2.5 billion people each month. This number better reflects our community for a couple of reasons. First, it refers to individual people rather than active accounts, so it excludes when people have multiple active accounts on a single app. And second, it reflects that many people use more than one of our services. And Dave will explain this in a little more detail later.
I want to start by talking about all the investments we've made over the last six months to improve safety, security and privacy across our services. This has been a lot of hard work and it's starting to pay off.
We recently launched two important ad transparency tools: one to let anyone see the ads any page is running even if the ads aren't targeted to you; and the other an archive of ads with political or issue content that's starting in the U.S. ready for the midterm election. These ads are now labeled so you can clearly see who's paying for them and, within the archives, you can see the budget associated with each ad, how many people saw it, and search all ads with political or issue content that an advertiser has run for up to seven years. This level of transparency will mean increased accountability and responsibility for advertisers globally.

Over the next 18 months, there are important elections beyond the U.S. in Brazil, India, and the EU, and these will all be real tests for Facebook. But I'm confident that we will get this right given our results during last year's French and German elections, the Alabama special election, as well as this month's presidential election in Mexico, where our systems found and removed thousands of fake account pages and groups that violated our policies.
Of course, security is not a problem that you ever fully solve. We face sophisticated well-funded adversaries who are constantly evolving. But, during each election, we learn and improve too. We're also making progress in the fight against misinformation. We're getting rid of the financial incentives for spammers to create fake news, much of which is economically motivated. We stopped pages that repeatedly spread false information from buying ads. And we also use AI to prevent fake accounts that generate a lot of the problematic content from ever being created in the first place.
Our investments in AI mean that we can now remove more bad content quickly because we don't have to wait until after it's reported. It frees our reviewers to work on cases where human expertise is needed to understand the context or nuance of a situation.
In Q1, for example, almost 90% of graphic violence content that we removed or added a warning label to was identified using AI. This shift from reactive to proactive detection is a big change, and it will make Facebook safer for everyone.
I also want to talk about privacy. GDPR was an important moment for our industry. We did see a decline in monthly actives in Europe, down by about 1 million people as a result. And at the same time, it was encouraging to see the vast majority of people affirm that they want us to use context, including from websites they visit, to make their ads more relevant and improve their overall product experience.
Looking ahead, we will continue to invest heavily in security and privacy because we have a responsibility to keep people safe. But, as I've said on past calls, we're investing so much in security that it will significantly impact our profitability. We're starting to see that this quarter. But, in addition to this, we also have a responsibility to keep building services that bring people closer together in new ways as well.
Now, in light of increased investment in security, we could choose to decrease our investment in new product areas, but we're not going to, because that wouldn't be the right way to serve our community and because we run this company for the long term not for the next quarter. And Dave will talk about this in a few minutes.
Now, perhaps one of the most important things we've done this year to bring people closer together is to shift News Feed to encourage connection with friends and family over passive consumption of content. We've launched multiple changes over the last half to News Feed that encourage more interaction and engagement between people, and we plan to keep launching more like this.
Now, of course, connecting isn't limited to News Feed. Now, there are more than 200 million people that are members of meaningful groups on Facebook, and these are communities that, upon joining, they become the most important part of your Facebook experience and a big part of your real world social infrastructure. These are groups for new parents, for people with rare diseases, for volunteering, for military families deployed to a new base and more.
We believe there is a community for every one on Facebook. And these meaningful communities often spend online and offline and bring people together in person. We found that every great community has an engaged leader. But running a group can take a lot of time. So we have a road map to make this easier. That will enable more meaningful groups to get formed, which will help us to find relevant ones to recommend to you, and eventually achieve our five-year goal of helping 1 billion people be a part of meaningful communities.

Now, since the 1970s, there has been this long decline in people joining physical groups around the world, and that has contributed to a broad feeling of loneliness and isolation. But if we can help 1 billion people be a part of something meaningful, then that can help reverse this trend.
Talking about being a part of something meaningful, it's been inspiring to see how people are using our fundraising tools to make a difference. Last month, a campaign to raise $1,500 for undocumented children separated from their families at the border ended up going viral and raising more than $20 million from more than 0.5 million donors all around the world. This quarter, we added the ability for pages to create and donate to fundraisers for causes that they care about too.
This quarter, we also reached a milestone with now more than 1 billion actives on Instagram. And this is a moment to reflect on how this acquisition has been an amazing success. When Instagram joined us the team had only 16 people. And since then, Kevin and the team have built Stories, Direct, and now IGTV. This has been a story of great innovation and product execution. And it's also a story of how effective the integration has been.
We believe Instagram has been able to use Facebook's infrastructure to grow more than twice as quickly as it would have on its own. So a big congratulations to the Instagram team and to all the teams across our company that have contributed to this success.
I'm really excited about video too. And this quarter, we launched IGTV. People are watching less TV, but more video, but most video is not yet optimized for mobile. IGTV will help solve that problem. It's designed specifically for mobile and makes watching long-form vertical video from creators easy. There's a stand-alone IGTV app, but you can also watch within the Instagram app, so that means the entire Instagram community has been able to use it from the start.
We're also seeing Watch start to grow more quickly on Facebook too. Our teams are focused on building new experiences that help people connect and start conversation. We recently rolled out Watch Party to all groups, so you can watch and chat with friends at the same time. And we're seeing some real traction with some of the original program, from the talk show Red Table Talk, featuring Jada Pinkett Smith, to Skam, an interactive series that started in Norway and features a new style of storytelling where the characters have accounts on Facebook and Instagram, and key parts of the story are told not just through video, but through posts on their pages.
Stories continue to be a big part of the future of sharing too, and they're growing quickly across WhatsApp, Instagram, Facebook and Messenger. While we started off just implementing the basic Stories format, we've now moved well beyond it, and have built lots of new features like polls, questions, and collaborative stories and groups and events. And we're also making progress developing Stories into a great format for ads. We've made the most progress here on Instagram, but this quarter, we started testing Stories ads on Facebook too.
The other major trend we're seeing is the shift to more private messaging. There's a lot to build here. We've been testing payments on WhatsApp in India, and it gives people a really simple way to send money to each other and contribute to greater financial inclusion. And of the people who have tested this, feedback and usage have been very strong. All signs point to a lot of people wanting to use this when the government gives us the green light. And in the meantime, we've broadened our focus to building this for other countries so we can give more people this ability faster. Over the next five years, we're focused on building out the business ecosystem around messaging on WhatsApp and Messenger.

More broadly, our strategy is to use Facebook's computing infrastructure, business platforms and security systems to serve people across all of our apps. For example, we made the decision a decade ago to build our own data centers, and we opened our first custom-built data center in 2011. Today, we have six data centers around the world, and we're working on building eight more. We're using AI systems in our global community operations team to fight spam, harassment, hate speech, and terrorism across all of our apps to keep people safe. And this is incredibly useful for apps like WhatsApp and Instagram as it helps us manage the challenges of hyper-growth there more effectively.
Beyond apps and looking at the next 10 years, we're making a lot of progress with virtual reality. Our goal is to create that feeling of presence like you're right there with people you care about even if you might be halfway around the world. Oculus Go is off to a good start, and at $199, it's going to be how a lot of people experience virtual reality for the first time. Overall, this is a critical year for Facebook. We've made progress preventing abuse, forged ahead with new innovation, and are adapting our services to the new trends of messaging, Stories, videos and groups.
As always, thank you for being a part of this journey, and I'm looking forward to making more progress together. And now, here is Sheryl to talk about our business.
Sheryl Kara Sandberg - Facebook, Inc.
Hi, everyone. It was a good second quarter with ad revenue growing 42% year-over-year. Mobile ad revenue was $11.9 billion, a 50% increase year-over-year, making up approximately 91% of total ad revenue. Our growth, again, was broad-based across regions, marketer segments and verticals.
We are working to ensure that Facebook is a safe place for people and businesses. We've taken strong steps to address a number of issues, including election integrity, fake news and protecting people's information. One of the most important things we can do to affect change is to increase transparency because transparency leads to greater accountability.
For example, when anyone can see any ad on Facebook, advertisers have to stand behind the ads they run. Transparency also allows us to get more input from our community and from experts around the world, so that we can find and fix problems. We wish we could find everything ourselves, but we never will, so we're building tools to make it easier for people to report issues to us.
As Mark mentioned, this quarter, we took major steps to make advertising in pages more transparent. Now anyone can see all the ads a page is running across Facebook, Instagram, Messenger and Audience Network. You can also learn more about pages even if they don't advertise. You can see when a page was created and if they've changed their name.
For political and issue ads, we're going even further. Advertisers placing ads with political content are now required to verify their identity and location. These ads will be labeled with a disclosure about who paid for them and saved in a searchable archive.
The vast majority of ads on Facebook are run by legitimate organizations from small businesses looking for new customers to advocacy groups raising money for their causes. But we've seen that bad actors can misuse our products too, so we're erring on the side of transparency. We're being intentionally broad in our interpretation of political and issue ads. This includes ads for books about politicians and brand campaigns that touch on national issues.
Given our commitment to transparency, we think it's important to apply this policy to more ads rather than fewer. These steps are just the start. We'll keep looking for ways to improve, and we hope these tools become standard across the industry. As we make these investments in transparency and accountability, we remain focused on our key priorities: helping businesses leverage the power of mobile, developing innovative ad products, and making our ads more relevant and effective.

First: leveraging the power of mobile. For businesses, winning on mobile now means winning on video. Globally, people are creating and watching more video, especially on mobile devices. According to eMarketer, nearly a quarter of the world's population will watch video on a mobile phone this year. We see this trend toward video across all of our apps, from people sharing more video with their friends on Facebook, to watching more video from creators on Instagram, to having more video calls on WhatsApp and Messenger.
Marketers are making more video of their own. We're seeing healthy growth in video ads among all advertiser segments. M&M's UK recently used mobile-optimized five-second video ads on Facebook and Instagram to introduce M&M's Mix, a bag of three kinds of M&M's in one. Their campaign worked, driving results not just for their new product but for the brand overall. Their sales increased by over 10% and 80% of that came from households that had not bought M&M's in the previous 26 weeks.
Second: developing new ad products. We know that creating video can be more difficult for small businesses that have fewer resources, so we've launched new tools on Facebook to help anyone make videos that work well on mobile. Last quarter, we released Ads Animator, a simple way to create eye-catching video ads using photos and other content that's already on a company's Facebook page. We're also testing Video Creation Kit, which gives advertisers easy-to-use video templates for different marketing objectives. By learning what performs best across our platform, we can help other businesses succeed.
We're also making it easier to run ads on Instagram and in Stories. Ads in Stories are an immersive engaging way for people to interact with businesses. When online retailer Overstock wanted to gain new customers and increase furniture sales, they ran video ads in Instagram Stories with a shop now button. They saw an 18% increase in return on ad spend and a 20% decrease in cost per acquisition. This quarter, we made it easier for more advertisers to adopt the Stories format. When an advertiser uploads video in a square or horizontal format for feed, we can automatically transform it into the full-screen vertical format of Stories.
Third: making our ads more relevant and effective. We're building new products and improving existing ones to ensure advertisers can reach the right audience. For example, automatic placements help advertisers get better results by showing ads across our platform wherever they'll perform best and at the lowest cost. SumUp, a German payment start-up that helps small businesses accept debit and credit cards, switched from manual to automatic placements and increased sales by 34% in one week.
Advertisers of all sizes want to know if their ads are working and how to make them better, but smaller businesses don't always have this capability. We're changing that. Last year, we introduced Test and Learn, a way for advertisers to run variations of their ads and measure the results in just a few steps. We started with tools for direct response advertisers to figure out what drives conversions.
In Q2, we added a way for companies to understand the effect of their ads on brand perception. We plan to roll this out to all advertisers, big and small, so they can easily experiment with different strategies and find the ones that work best.
As always, I'm grateful to our teams around the world. Their work over the past several months has helped millions of businesses grow and created new levels of transparency in advertising. I'd also like to thank our partners and the businesses of all sizes who turned to us to reach their customers and give us the feedback that helps make us better.
Thank you. And now, here's Dave.

David M. Wehner - Facebook, Inc.
Thanks, Sheryl, and good afternoon, everyone. Let's start with our community metrics. Daily active users on Facebook reached 1.47 billion, up 11% compared to last year, led by growth in India, Indonesia and the Philippines. This number represents approximately 66% of the 2.23 billion monthly active users in Q2. MAUs were up 228 million or 11% compared to last year. It's worth noting that MAU and DAU in Europe were both down slightly quarter-over-quarter due to the GDPR roll out, consistent with the outlook we gave on the Q1 call.
As Mark mentioned, we're also introducing a family-wide audience metric, 2.5 billion people worldwide used one of our applications in June. This is our best estimate of our de-duplicated audience across Facebook, Instagram, Messenger, and WhatsApp. We believe this number better reflects the size of our community and the fact that many people are using more than one of these services.
Note that, for comparison purposes, Facebook MAU does count multiple accounts for a single user when such accounts exist, and we estimate those represent approximately 10% of our Facebook MAU as previously disclosed in the limitation of key metrics section in our SEC filings. The family audience metric only counts a single user in these instances.
Turning now to the financials; all comparisons are on a year-over-year basis unless otherwise noted. Q2 total revenue was $13.2 billion, up 42% or 38% on a constant currency basis. Foreign exchange tailwinds contributed approximately $370 million of revenue in Q2. Q2 ad revenue was $13 billion, up 42% or 38% on a constant currency basis.
In terms of ad revenue by region, Europe and Asia-Pacific both grew fastest at 47% each and benefited from foreign exchange tailwinds. I'd note that European ad revenue growth decelerated more quickly than other regions and was impacted primarily by reduced currency tailwinds and, to a lesser extent, the roll out of GDPR.
Mobile ad revenue was $11.9 billion, up 50%, and represents approximately 91% of ad revenue. In Q2, the average price per ad increased 17% and the number of ad impressions served across our services increased 21%, driven primarily by ads in feed on Instagram and Facebook. Payments and other fees revenue was $193 million, up 23%.
Turning now to expenses; total expenses were $7.4 billion, up 50%. We ended Q2 with over 30,000 full-time employees, up 47% compared to last year. Operating income was $5.9 billion, representing a 44% operating margin. Our effective tax rate in the quarter was 13%.
Net income was $5.1 billion or $1.74 per share. Capital expenditures were $3.5 billion, driven by investments in data centers, servers, network infrastructure, and office facilities. In Q2, we generated $2.8 billion of free cash flow and ended the quarter with approximately $42 billion in cash and investments. And, in the second quarter, we bought back approximately $3.2 billion of our Class A common stock.
Turning now to the revenue outlook; our total revenue growth rate decelerated approximately 7 percentage points in Q2 compared to Q1. Our total revenue growth rates will continue to decelerate in the second half of 2018, and we expect our revenue growth rates to decline by high-single digit percentages from prior quarters sequentially in both Q3 and Q4.
There are several factors contributing to that deceleration. For example, we expect currency to be a slight headwind in the second half versus the tailwinds we have experienced over the last several quarters. We plan to grow and promote certain engaging experiences like Stories that currently have lower levels of monetization, and we are also giving people who use our services more choices around data privacy, which may have an impact on our revenue growth.

Turning now to expenses; we continue to expect that full-year 2018 total expenses will grow in the range of 50% to 60% compared to last year. In addition to increases in core product development and infrastructure, this growth is driven by increasing investment in areas like safety and security, AR/VR, marketing, and content acquisition. Looking beyond 2018, we anticipate that total expense growth will exceed revenue growth in 2019.
Over the next several years, we would anticipate that our operating margins will trend towards the mid-30s on a percentage basis. We expect full-year 2018 capital expenditures will be approximately $15 billion, driven by investments in data centers, servers, network infrastructure, and office facilities. We plan to continue to grow capital expenditures beyond 2018 to support global growth and our ongoing product needs.
Turning now to tax; at current stock prices, we expect our full-year 2018 tax rate will be in the mid-teens, but that our Q3 tax rate will be 25% to 30% due to a one-time charge related to a recent court ruling in the IRS versus Altera case. As a reminder, fluctuations in our stock price will impact our tax price.
In summary, our community and business growth remain solid. Our financial strength has enabled us to invest heavily to improve our ability to serve our global community through our family of apps as well as to prepare us for the future.
With that, operator, let's open up the call for questions.
Question-and-Answer Session
Operator
Your first question comes from the line of Brian Nowak from Morgan Stanley.
Brian Nowak - Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC
Thanks for taking my questions. Two. Just the first one on monetization of Facebook core versus Instagram; can you talk a little bit about how you think about monetization levels and the key drivers currently and, going forward, when we think about ad load, pricing and the importance of ad improvements across the two platforms over the next, call it, year or so?
And the second one on Instagram TV, maybe just talk about how you look at – think about the core consumer offering, how it varies from Facebook Watch and, philosophically, how you think about investing in premium content or sports content across these two products. Thanks.
David M. Wehner - Facebook, Inc.
Brian, I'll take the first one. In terms of Facebook versus Instagram, they're obviously both contributing to revenue growth. Instagram is growing more quickly and making an increasing contribution to growth. And we've been pleased with how Instagram is growing. Facebook and Instagram are really one ads ecosystem. I think, from a supply perspective, both now from a feed perspective are at similar ad loads. Instagram has more heavy usage of Stories, so that's an area of continued growth opportunity because the effective levels of monetization in Stories are lower.
On the demand side, we see a good traction across both platforms, and we're rolling out more ability for advertisers to leverage ads in Stories with more formats and the like. So that's, again, an important opportunity for growth is just continuing to build out more products on the demand side for Stories.
Mark Elliot Zuckerberg - Facebook, Inc.
And I can take the second part of the question about the – what we're trying to do with IGTV and Watch at the same time. The IGTV product approach is very focused on helping people connect with creators in a mobile-native vertical video format and helping people not only see content that they love from people that they want to follow, but build a community around those creators, which is what we see people are trying to do. And creators now uniquely have the ability to both reach a large audience and connect and engage the community through the social network on Instagram at the same time.

With Watch, a lot of what we're trying to do is make it so the video content that's on Facebook and some of the content that we're acquiring through original programming that people can come together with their friends to watch that content through things like Watch Party and engage and build community that way.
So there's a big space here in terms of helping people have real connections and interactions around video. These are two different takes on this. Overall, what you're going to see from us on video is not just try to optimize for overall watch time, but to optimize for building products that help bring people together and help facilitate real interactions between people.
Operator
Your next question comes from the line of Eric Sheridan from UBS.
Eric J. Sheridan - UBS Securities LLC
Thanks for taking the question. Maybe going back to the OpEx and your comments, Dave, looking out sort of medium to longer term, just wanted to understand if we can get a little bit more color on some of the drivers of that. How much of it could be video in support of where you want to take the business over the medium and long term versus things that maybe don't necessarily have a revenue component to them like the security and the protection of the ecosystem that the whole team has been talking about since the end of last year? Thanks so much.
David M. Wehner - Facebook, Inc.
Yeah, Eric, it's going to be a combination of those factors. I would say we're going to continue to invest in core product development and infrastructure. And so, you've seen that already in terms of the ramp that we have in capital expenditures. We're continuing to build out features and functionality for the community across a wide range of different products, whether it be the ad products that Sheryl talked about or IGTV and the like.
In addition to those core developments, we're also making the significant long-term investments in safety and security. Those investments are in the billions of dollars per year. Those will have a negative impact on margins. We think that's the right thing to do for the business in terms of ensuring the community's safety and security and the durability of the franchise. So those are important investments from an ROI perspective, but they don't have, obviously, immediate translation into revenue dollars.
Secondly, we're continuing to make big investments in innovation. Those, we believe, are attractive long-term investments. The things that I would point to are things like AI as well as our investments in AR and VR. Those are things that will play out – AI in the near-term, but the investments in AR and VR are really about building the next generation of computing, and that's got a longer-term return window. So, attractive investments we believe, but ones that will take longer-term to pay off, and those would have a dilutive effect on margins in the near-term. Those are the two factors that I would point to.
In addition, on the CapEx side, we're continuing to invest heavily on capital expenditures, first, to just get ahead of user growth and engagement and then also to make sure that we've got the compute available to support the growth of a number of the key drivers of our business around feed ranking and ads ranking. So, I think those are the things that I would point to, all factoring into the margin guidance that I gave.
Operator
Your next question comes from the line of Ross Sandler from Barclays. Your next question is from the line of Ross Sandler from Barclays.
Ross Sandler - Barclays Capital, Inc.
Hi. Can you hear me?
Sheryl Kara Sandberg - Facebook, Inc.
Yes.
Ross Sandler - Barclays Capital, Inc.
Can you guys hear me?
David M. Wehner - Facebook, Inc.
Yes.
Sheryl Kara Sandberg - Facebook, Inc.
Yes.
Ross Sandler - Barclays Capital, Inc.

Okay. Sorry. Dave, I think you said that the quarter-on-quarter growth rates are going to be high-single digits lower than the prior-year quarter-on-quarter growth rates versus 3Q and 4Q. That would imply around a 20% year-on-year growth rate exiting fourth quarter. So just want to clarify, is that what you actually said? And if so, what's driving this fairly dramatic deceleration in revenue growth?
David M. Wehner - Facebook, Inc.
Ross, so, yes, so we grew at 42% in the current quarter and we would expect decel in the high-single digits for the next couple quarters. In terms of what is driving the deceleration, it's a combination of factors, and I think I outlined those in my commentary. First of all, there's the currency, which is going from being a tailwind to being a modest headwind, we expect.
Secondly, we're going to be focusing on growing engaging new experiences like Stories and promoting those. And that's going to have a negative impact on revenue growth. And then, finally, we're giving people who use the services more choice around privacy, and that's coming both in terms of impacts that could be ongoing from things like GDPR as well as other product options that we're providing that could have an impact on revenue growth. So it's a combination of all those factors that is leading to the deceleration of revenue growth in the second half.
Operator
Your next question comes from the line of Doug Anmuth from JPMorgan.
Douglas T. Anmuth - JPMorgan Securities LLC
Great. Thanks for taking the question. A question for Mark. I was hoping you could talk about the company's focus on meaningful social interactions. Several months into some of those changes, do you think behavior on platform has shifted at all? And would you expect the improvements in the experience to ultimately drive a rebound in core Facebook engagement? Thanks.
Mark Elliot Zuckerberg - Facebook, Inc.
Sure. So, we've launched a number of changes that are focused towards trying to encourage more interaction at the expense of some passive consumption on the network. And we found that these have generally encouraged more interaction or positives, so we're going to keep on moving in this direction.
We're doing this for a number of reasons. One is that we just started getting a lot of feedback from people in the community that they wanted Facebook to be more about connecting with people, which is really the core of what it's always been, less so about viral videos or news content and just passive consumption. So that's one.
Another big driver is we've focused on trying to make sure that we understand the effects of using our services on people's well-being. That's important for all companies. And the research there is very clear that when people are using the Internet, and including our services, to interact with other people, that's associated with all the positive elements of well-being that you'd expect: feeling more connected, feeling less lonely, feeling happier, and long-term measures of health but when you're simply using the Internet to passively consume content that isn't necessarily associated with positive improvements to well-being.
So, both because of the feedback that we were getting and the research, we felt like this was really the right direction to go in. We're seeing positive signs in terms of how it's encouraging people to interact more. Of the usage on the platform, we do think that that is the most valuable usage, but that's why we're going in that direction. And everything that we've seen so far suggests to us that we should continue moving in that direction more.
Operator
Your next question comes from the line of Heather Bellini from Goldman Sachs.
Heather Bellini - Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC
Great. Thank you. And, Mark, thank you for all the detailed commentary in the beginning. I was just wondering if you could share with us, as you look ahead over the next 12 to 24 months and you think of assets that you have that you aren't currently monetizing in material ways, which of those do you think about – when you think about kind of layering on the next leg of the stool, if you will, which one of those would you expect us or would you expect to see start to contribute in a more meaningful way over the next couple of years? How would you rank order those assets that are not currently being monetized in a significant way at this point? Thank you.

Sheryl Kara Sandberg - Facebook, Inc.
I'll take it. So, obviously, we started with ads in Facebook, and that was something we have grown and they continue to grow. The ads have expanded quite nicely to Instagram, and Instagram represents a very healthy part of the growth and we expect that to continue as well. When you think about things that are further out, I think you then start talking about our messaging apps.
We are furthest ahead in Messenger, but it's still very early days. We're quite happy with consumer engagement with 1.3 billion monthly actives on the platform, and we continue to see a lot of organic connections between businesses and consumers on the messaging platform. We now have over 8 billion messages sent between people and businesses per month, which includes automated messages. We're being very slow and deliberate with monetization. It's still in early days. But I think we've launched some things that people are excited about and interested in like click-to-Messenger ads.
We also have some early nice results we can share from clients. One of them recently was LEGO. They launched a Messenger bot to help with gift recommendations, and they created a click-to-Messenger ads that link to a LEGO bot which helped provide product and gift recommendations.
They reached people over 25 years old in the U.S., UK, France and Germany, and targeted people who are interested in LEGO toys and shopping, and they found a 3.4 times higher return on ad spend for click-to-Messenger ads versus those that just linked to the LEGO website. And I share that case because it shows what we're excited about. We're excited about a new surface where businesses can interact with consumers, but also really a new functionality.
If you go further out, you would then start thinking about WhatsApp. We are very focused there on the user experience, but we're also focused even earlier stages on growing our business ecosystem. The WhatsApp Business app has launched, and we now have more than 3 million people actively using it to test business solutions. So that's further out, but we think it has potential as well.
Operator
Your next question comes from the line of Mark Mahaney from RBC Capital Markets.
Mark Mahaney - RBC Capital Markets LLC
Two questions, please; a near term one and a long term one. The near term one is can you just comment on what you're seeing in terms of MAU recovery growth trends in Europe? You haven't – you gave us what turned out to be a pretty accurate read into the June quarter, so do you have a read into whether things have based out and started to improve again post GDPR implementation?
And then, I know, Sheryl, you just talked about this, but can I just ask you to just maybe comment a little bit more on Facebook Messenger? I've just seen the ad units there. They seem to be – there seemed like there's been a pickup recently in implementation of ads there that seemed to me to be highly effective and reasonably well targeted. So any learnings just from those, the basic ad units that you put in there beyond the – kind of the business metrics you just reported on? Thank you.
David M. Wehner - Facebook, Inc.
Hey, Mark. It's Dave. On Europe, yeah, we don't have any update on trends. We had indicated in the first quarter that we would expect to see a decline. We're not providing any guidance on MAU and DAU in Europe on this call.
Sheryl Kara Sandberg - Facebook, Inc.
In terms of number two, we have an ad model where we're able to use the targeting capabilities for Facebook. But when we put ads into a new surface, we obviously learn and evolve. So, one example of some of the things that we're excited about, again, are the click-to-Messenger ads. That's something we can put in News Feed in Instagram and Messenger and it both grows the ecosystem and creates a new opportunity for interaction.

We also have inbox ads where we're enabling advertisers to extend their reach to people in Messenger, which is still really early. And we're also in the early days of sponsored messages, which enable businesses to reengage people once a conversation has started. And so, when we think about the format of Messenger, we think about the direct correspondence between a person, either an existing or a potential client or with a business, and we think there are many times in kind of a life cycle of interacting with a business where that's a very attractive opportunity.
Operator
Your next question comes from the line of John Blackledge from Cowen.
John Blackledge - Cowen & Co. LLC
Great. Thanks. Mark or Sheryl, could you discuss your view about the importance of Instagram as a discovery platform for new and/or emerging brands and merchants? And then, over time, as these merchants and brands mature, how do you view Instagram's ability to monetize? And then just a quick one on North American ad revenue; it was a bit lower than we expected in the second quarter. Don't know if you guys have any color there. Thank you.
Sheryl Kara Sandberg - Facebook, Inc.
On the first, when we think about Instagram, we think we have a great opportunity; 25 million Instagram business profiles, 2 million advertisers. We're growing quite nicely across brand and DR. And with 1 billion active people on the platform, I think Instagram is definitely both a direct response opportunity but an opportunity for discovery. Part of it's the format. The format is so visually appealing and people are telling stories with pictures, so we see both anecdotally and in the data that this is a great place for people to become aware of a product in the first place. And we see a lot of small businesses really able to do things on the platform.
I'll share a recent example. We just launched a shopping experience that was just expanded in Q2 to all consumers in an additional 45 countries. DefShop is an e-commerce fashion brand in Germany. They were an early tester for IG Shopping. And what they did in that test is tag each article of clothing. They had 56% more website visitors and a 64% increase in sales for tagged products. And I think a lot of those were discovered and purchased right through that advertising funnel.
David M. Wehner - Facebook, Inc.
John, its Dave. Just on the North American deceleration in ad revenue growth, kind of consistent with the trends we've seen, so nothing there notable. I would say we're pleased at the growth that we're seeing at the scale at which we're operating. When you look at the deceleration, the one that I called out was really Europe where you saw the currency impact as well as, to a lesser extent, GDPR causing sort of faster deceleration than in the other regions. I would say North America was more kind of within kind of what we're seeing across the rest of the business.
Operator
Your next question comes from the line of Justin Post from Bank of America/Merrill Lynch.
Justin Post - Bank of America/Merrill Lynch
Great. Thank you. The guidance for the deceleration might raise some questions just on Facebook engagement. So just wondering how you're seeing activity within just core Facebook right now? Is it growing at a healthy rate? And then, secondly, you have had a couple of months now with GDPR. Just wondering how you're thinking about how that will impact your ad targeting over the next year. Thank you.
David M. Wehner - Facebook, Inc.
Sure, Justin. I'll take that. So we're continuing to see good growth in the Facebook ecosystem with 11% DAU growth. And obviously, we've got broader family growth as well. In terms of, I guess, going to the GDPR question, we've talked about – oh, sorry. Sheryl, were you going to take the GDPR question?

Sheryl Kara Sandberg - Facebook, Inc.
Yeah, I can talk about GDPR. GDPR has not had a revenue impact, but we also recognize it wasn't fully rolled out this quarter. It was very encouraging for us to see that the vast majority of people affirmed that they want us to use information, including from the websites they visit, to make their ads more relevant. But, as we look further out, we recognize that there's still risk, and we're going to watch closely.
Advertisers are still adapting to the changes, so it's early to know the longer-term impact. And things like GDPR and other privacy changes that may happen from us or may happen with regulation could make ads more relevant. One thing that we know that's not going to change is that advertisers are always looking for the highest ROI opportunity. And what's most important in winning budget is our relative performance in the industry, and we believe we'll continue to do very well on that.
Operator
Your next question...
David M. Wehner - Facebook, Inc.
I'll give a little bit more color – sorry. I wanted to give a little bit more color on some of the different regional trends we're seeing on Facebook DAU. U.S. and Canada, sort of consistent with past quarters, has been flat at about 185 million, and we would expect that to continue to bounce around. Europe, we saw the declines that we anticipated from GDPR. And I would say there, really, those impacts were purely due to the GDPR impact, not other engagement trends. So I would point to that. Otherwise, I think feeling good about Europe.
Worldwide, we've got kind of different puts and takes. Indonesia had a SIM card registration requirement that caused a little bit of a headwind in APAC. And then rest of world, we saw some countries come back online like Ethiopia came back online. So some different puts and takes, but overall, still seeing regional growth across all regions with the exception of the U.S./Canada being flat.
Operator
Your next question comes from the line of Mark May from Citi.
Mark A. May - Citigroup Global Markets, Inc.
Thanks. Just following up on the comments, Sheryl mentioned that there's really no meaningful impact on GDPR to the ad business, at least as of now. But then, Dave, I think you mentioned that because you're giving people more control over their privacy and data that this is one of the reasons why you're expecting the meaningful decel in the second half; so just trying to recognize those two things. Maybe the questions have been too specific around the impact of GDPR and should be more broad around data and privacy? And I guess, ultimately, the question is what impact, if any, these greater controls that you're giving users having on ad revenue growth and monetization? Thanks.
David M. Wehner - Facebook, Inc.
Sure, Mark. Let me take that. So GDPR didn't have a significant impact in Q2, partially because of its implementation date. So you're just seeing effectively one month of it in terms of revenue. We do think that there will be some modest impact, and I don't want to overplay these factors, but you've got a couple of things going on. You've got the impact of the opt-outs. And while we're very pleased with the vast majority of people opting into the third-party data use, some did not. So that will have a small impact on revenue growth. And then we're seeing some impact from how advertisers are using their own data for targeting. So, again, that will have a modest impact on growth.
And then in addition, we're continuing to focus our product development around putting privacy first and that's going to, we believe, have some impact on revenue growth. So it's really a combination of kind of how we're approaching privacy as well as GDPR and the like. So I think all of those factors together are one of the factors that we're talking about; the other being, obviously, the currency flip.

Operator
Your next question comes from the line of Rich Greenfield from BTIG.
Richard Greenfield - BTIG LLC
Hey. Thanks for taking the question. So I guess one of the things as you look at, you talked about the growth you're seeing in users overseas or basically everywhere but the U.S. and Canada. But when you look at ARPU, your ARPU outside, even in Europe, is still only a real tiny fraction of where you are in the U.S. and, obviously in Asia and rest of world, an infinitesimal fraction of where you are in the U.S.
How does that factor into as you think about your long-term guidance that you just talked about, especially with margins moving towards the mid-30s, just given how early you are in those non-U.S. markets and how much headroom they have to grow as those ad markets mature. How do you have confidence that you, in that type of deceleration, when you look at how much upside there is in that ARPU?
David M. Wehner - Facebook, Inc.
Yeah, I guess you've got a couple of different factors going on there. You've got the opportunity, I think, for ARPU growth in those regions, and that's going to depend on the mix of countries in those regions and the GDP per capita in those countries as well as the relative size of the ad markets. And that correlates very strongly to our opportunity and our potential ARPU. And I think you've got upside growth potential in the long run in those markets.
As it relates to margin profile, you also just have the factor that you're increasing growth – the increasing mix of the business is shifting towards Asia and towards what are currently lower ARPU markets. And so, while those are very attractive, we believe, to serve both in the near and in the long run, they're going to have a different impact on margin because the cost to support those users relative to the revenue they bring in does have an impact on margins in the medium-term.
Operator
Your next question comes from the line of Anthony DiClemente from Evercore.
Anthony DiClemente - Evercore Group LLC
Thank you. I have two; one for Sheryl and one for Mark. Sheryl, in Dave's comments and the comments about the business impact of engagement shifting to Stories versus feed products, if you could spell out for us I guess the specific reasons why Stories monetization is not as strong as feed today and in the context perhaps of what needs to happen in the future for Stories monetization to rebound to, let's say, parity to where feed is today and sort of get through that negative impact.
And then, for Mark, I think perhaps Heather was getting at this in her question, but the company's investing so much into owned data centers. You talked about that I think in your prepared remarks. Are there ways to improve the return on investment of those investments in data center servers, network infrastructure? And what I'm thinking is in order to perhaps service third-parties to maybe just improve those returns in the way that other tech and Internet companies have in terms of investments in infrastructure. Thank you.
Sheryl Kara Sandberg - Facebook, Inc.
So, on Stories, we've seen great progress with Stories as a format for people to share on our platforms. We have 400 million people sharing with Instagram Stories, 450 million with WhatsApp Status. Facebook is newer, but we're seeing good progress there. The question is will this monetize at the same rate as News Feed? And we honestly don't know. We'll have to see what happens. There are good reasons to be very optimistic about the monetization. The opportunity, full-screen, authentic, very engaging, different format than feed, gives us an opportunity to grow.
We also don't have all of our advertisers yet creating story ads. So, obviously, as more and more advertisers come in and do that, the more and the better ads we'll have. I think getting that ramp will take a while because Stories is a new format, and we definitely see that it takes a while for advertisers to adopt new formats.

I think one of the other things we feel good about over the long run, not really the short run, is that since we have so many different places where you have Stories formats in Instagram and WhatsApp and Facebook, as volume increases of the opportunity, advertisers get more interested. But we won't know for a while if it's going to monetize at the same rate. We do feel very good about a new and very engaging opportunity for ads.
Operator
Your next question...
Mark Elliot Zuckerberg - Facebook, Inc.
And I can quickly answer the second part around data centers. I mean the quick answer is that we're not planning on going in to the cloud services. We're not planning on doing that. We have to build out all this capacity to serve our community. It's a very computationally and resource-intensive set of services that we provide and we need to build that out.
We are very optimistic. I'm very optimistic about AI overall and being able to use more computing resources to be able to crunch more data to be able to rank News Feed and ads and search and friend suggestions, and all the important things that we use our AI systems to do in addition to the integrity and security work. Part of the advance in AI technology now allows us to use more compute to use all the data that's in the system to provide better results, so we certainly plan on doing that.
Operator
Your next question comes from the line of Peter Stabler from Wells Fargo Securities.
Peter C. Stabler - Wells Fargo Securities LLC
Thanks. One for Sheryl and then one for Dave. Sheryl, just on the SMB side, wondering if you could give us any color by region, if possible. And then secondly, on the go-to-market strategy, to what extent is Facebook dependent upon or leveraging resellers versus small businesses discovering the ad platform on their own? How key is that reseller channel for you on the small business side? And then, for Dave, given that you've given us some kind of relatively specific guidance on the revenue growth decel through the remainder of the year, I'm wondering if you could give us some color on what that embeds from an FX expectation at this point. Thank you very much.
Sheryl Kara Sandberg - Facebook, Inc.
So SMBs are very core to our business and, with over 80 million SMB pages that are using Facebook on a monthly basis, we know they're core to theirs. Our 6 million advertisers come from those pages, and so the fact that we have so much room to grow is exciting for us. We don't break this out by region, but we do see very strong SMB participation across the board and around the world, particularly as SMBs come online, the more. So, you can imagine that some of it goes with Internet penetration and Internet use.
In terms of resellers, we think it's a big opportunity. We don't break that out either. But, obviously, some of our ads are sold directly and bought directly through our online interfaces. We also have third-parties that sell our ads and we welcome that as well.
David M. Wehner - Facebook, Inc.
Peter, its Dave. Just on the FX, we're just looking at current rates and just rolling those forward, not predicting what the rates will be, but rather looking at current rates and thus what the impact would be if rates stay the same on the second half.
Operator
Your next question comes from the line of Brent Thill from Jefferies.
Brent Thill - Jefferies LLC
Thanks. Dave, I want to go back to the magnitude of the deceleration. I think many investors are having a hard time reconciling that type of deceleration considering how good the advertiser feedback is on your platform. And I realize you've outlined FX and Stories and the other factors, but is there something that you're hearing now from advertisers that is giving you more confidence that they're seeing something different about what we're all hearing right now? It just seems like the magnitude is beyond anything we've seen, especially across a number of tech names we all cover.

David M. Wehner - Facebook, Inc.
Yeah. Brent, I'll take that. And if Sheryl wants to add color, she should step in as well. This is consistent – we consistently have seen over last eight quarters constant currency deceleration. So, there's a continuation of this trend. I don't think there's anything beyond that in the factors that I outlined.
I would note we've been benefiting from continued growth across Instagram. Instagram ad load in feed is at the same level as Facebook, so that would be – that's certainly been helpful in our recent quarters. So I think when you look at the factors going forward, I would say we've got the currency impact, we've got some of the impacts around privacy and the like, but we continue to get good advertiser feedback on ROI. We continue to believe we're delivering great ROI for advertisers. So I don't think there's anything from the advertiser perspective that's necessarily playing out differently than expectations. Sheryl can add any color there.
Sheryl Kara Sandberg - Facebook, Inc.
Yeah, I'd add there. Even at decreasing growth rates, we are still growing and predicting growth at very healthy rates, and that's based on returning for advertisers. We're very focused on helping advertisers meet their ultimate goals, looking at their ROI, looking at the return they get on ringing the cash register, whether that cash register rings online or offline. And we hear from them and we continue to see in our results that we continue to deliver strong results. So we have a lot of opportunity ahead of us. We're going to continue investing in that opportunity. And what we're hearing from advertisers all over the world is that they want to continue to grow and invest with us as well.
Deborah Crawford - Facebook, Inc.
Operator, we have time for one last question.
Operator
The last question comes from the line of Colin Sebastian from Robert W. Baird.
Colin Alan Sebastian - Robert W. Baird & Co., Inc.
Great. Thanks. Just a couple of follow ups for me. First off, Dave, maybe I missed this, but what timeframe are you referring to in terms of getting down to the mid-30s operating margin? And does that outlook assume any meaningful contribution from any of the new areas of innovation that you highlighted on the call? Just trying to figure out how much of that might be more conservatism.
And then, on the near-term trends and the midterm elections in the U.S., given the amount of scrutiny that will exist in your platform, how should we think about your level of preparation on one hand to manage content? And then, on the other hand, is this part of the potential impact on monetization revenue growth in the back half of the year that you're taking into consideration? Thanks.
David M. Wehner - Facebook, Inc.
Sure, Collin. Let me take a crack at that. So, in terms of the guidance, I've given guidance. This is several years, so more than two but less than many. So it's over a timeframe more than two years is our expectation. And then in terms of does that have any meaningful contribution from areas of innovation, we talked about some of the areas that we're investing in. Obviously, on the safety and security side, those are costs that are layering in that we think are the right thing to do for the business but don't necessarily have a revenue impact. So it certainly takes those into account.
It also takes into account the ongoing investments we're making in the longer-term innovation work, which I don't think will necessarily have any meaningful revenue relative to the size of the business in those time frames. We're also investing in things like video, Watch and the like, which have the potential to condition tribute on the revenue side, but still relatively small in perspective of the overall business.

Mark Elliot Zuckerberg - Facebook, Inc.
All right. And I can take the question on the midterm elections. So, yes, the short answer is that we're much more confident that we're going to get this right for the elections in the 2018, which include the U.S. midterms, but also the elections in Brazil and upcoming elections in early-2019 in India and the EU. And the reason why we're confident that we can get this right is because there have been several elections since the 2016 ones that have had much better results, including the French presidential election, the German elections, the Alabama special election, and the Mexican election about a month ago.
And in each of these – going back to 2016, we were – we have a very big security team that was focused on security around even the 2016 election and we found hacking and phishing attacks that the Russian government was trying to do, and we notified the right people about those. But 2016 was really the first time that we saw this kind of coordinated information operation. And since then, we've built the playbook out that has included building AI tools to identify thousands of fake accounts and groups and pages that violate the policies. It's included growing the security and content review teams to 20,000 people to be able to handle the volume of work that we need to do. And it includes a lot of the transparency work around advertising in general, but also the political and issue ads archive and verifying all advertisers who are trying to run political and issue ads.
There are a number of other things that we're doing too, including creating an external program for independent academics to study how the impact of social media and how foreign governments try to interfere in elections. And that will have a longer-term impact as well. But the short answer here is we've been very focused on this. 2018 is a big year. And because of the successful results that we've seen in a number of elections recently, we feel like our road map and our level of preparation is much higher now than it has been. And we feel relatively confident going into these elections.
Deborah Crawford - Facebook, Inc.
Great. Thank you. Thank you for joining us today. We appreciate your time, and we look forward to speaking with you again.
Operator
Ladies and gentlemen, this concludes today's conference call. Thank you for joining us. You may now disconnect your lines.Microchip Technology, Inc. (NASDAQ:MCHP) Q2 2018 Earnings Conference Call November  6, 2017  5:00 PM ET
Executives
James Bjornholt - VP & CFO
Ganesh Moorthy - President & COO
Stephen Sanghi - CEO & Chairman
Analysts
Vivek Arya - Bank of America Merrill Lynch
John Pitzer - Crédit Suisse Aegean
Craig Ellis - B. Riley & Co.
William Stein - SunTrust Robinson Humphrey
Christopher Caso - Raymond James & Associates
Christopher Danely - Citigroup
Harlan Sur - JPMorgan Chase & Co.
Kevin Cassidy - Stifel, Nicolaus & Company
Christopher Rolland - Susquehanna Financial Group
Gilbert Alexandre - Darphil Associates
Mark Delaney - Goldman Sachs Group
Craig Hettenbach - Morgan Stanley
Rajvindra Gill - Needham & Company
Operator
Good day, everyone, and welcome to this Microchip Technology Second Quarter and Fiscal Year 2018 financial Results Conference Call. As a reminder, today's call is being recorded. At this time, I would like to turn the call over to Microchip's Chief Financial Officer, Mr. Eric Bjornholt. Please go ahead, sir.
James Bjornholt
Thank you, and good afternoon, everyone. During the course of this conference call, we will be making projections and other forward-looking statements regarding future events or the future financial performance of the company. We wish to caution you that such statements are predictions and that actual events or results may differ materially. We refer you to our press releases of today as well as our recent filings with the SEC that identify important risk factors that may impact Microchip's business and results of operations.
In attendance with me today are Steve Sanghi, Microchip's Chairman and CEO; and Ganesh Moorthy, Microchip's President and COO. I will comment on our second quarter fiscal year 2018 financial performance, and Steve and Ganesh will then give their comments on the results and discuss the current business environment as well as our guidance. We will then be available to respond to specific investor and analyst questions.
I want to remind you that we are including information in our press release on this conference call on various GAAP and non-GAAP measures. We have posted a full GAAP to non-GAAP reconciliation on the Investor Relations page of our website at www.microchip.com, which we believe you will find useful when comparing GAAP and non-GAAP results. I will now go through some of the operating results, including net sales, gross margin and operating expenses. I will be referring to these results on a non-GAAP basis prior to the effects of our acquisition activities and share-based compensation.
Net sales in the September quarter were a record $1.012 billion, well above our guidance and up 4.1% sequentially from net sales of $972.1 million in the immediately preceding quarter. This was Microchip's first quarter with more than a $1 billion in sales. We have posted a summary of our revenue by product line and geography on our website for your reference.
On a non-GAAP basis, gross margins were 61.04% in the September quarter and above the high end of our guidance, which was 60.75%. Non-GAAP operating expenses were 22.46% of sales, well just below the low end of our guidance of 22.5%. And non-GAAP operating income was a record 38.6%, well above the high end of our guidance of 38.25%. Non-GAAP net income was a record $344.1 million and was up 7.9% on a sequential basis and up 56.7% as compared to the same quarter last year. Non-GAAP earnings per diluted share was $1.41, which was $0.06 higher than the midpoint of our guidance of $1.35.
On a GAAP basis, gross margins, including share-based compensation and acquisition-related expenses, were 60.7% in the September quarter. GAAP gross margins include the impact of $3.7 million of share-based compensation. Total operating expenses were $388.7 million and include acquisition intangible amortization of $120.9 million, share based compensation of $19.9 million, $0.7 million of acquisition-related and other costs and special charges of $19.9 million, consisting primarily of a $19.5 million charge for fees associated with transitioning from the public utility provider in Oregon to a lower-cost direct access provider. This change is expected to provide significant expense and cash flow savings in the future. After these adjustments, GAAP net income was a record $189.2 million or $0.77 per diluted share. The non-GAAP tax rate was 9.1% in the September quarter, and the GAAP tax rate was a negative 1.6% for the quarter.

Moving on to the balance sheet. Our inventory balance at September 30, 2017, was $456.9 million. Microchip had 105 days of inventory at September 30, 2017, up 5 days from the end of the June quarter. Inventory days are still well below our targeted levels but are starting to improve from our significant capacity expansion efforts as well as selective and opportunistic buy-aheads of constrained materials.
Inventory at our distributors in the September quarter continued to be low at 31 days and were flat to the June quarter levels.
The cash flow from operating activities was a record $350.1 million in the September quarter. As of September 30, the consolidated cash and total investment position was $1.844 billion, of which about $550 million is domestic cash. We bought back 15.1 million of our 2,037 convertible bonds in the December quarter where the bondholders had elected to convert. We expect the remaining principal amount of $17.3 million of the 2,037 2 1/8% convertible bonds to either be converted by the bondholders or called by Microchip during the December 2017 quarter. The call date for these bonds is December 15, 2017.
Capital expenditures were $59.9 million in the September 2017 quarter. We expect about $70 million in capital spending in the December quarter and overall capital expenditures for the fiscal year 2018 to be about $200 million to $220 million, up from our prior guidance of $180 million as we capitalize on growth and cost reduction opportunities. We are aggressively adding capital to support the growth of our production capabilities for our fast-growing new products and technologies and to bring in-house more of the assembly and test operations that are currently outsourced. These capital investments will bring significant gross margin improvements to our business, particularly for the Atmel manufacturing activities that we are bringing into our own factories.
Our capital spending also reflects 3 new buildings we are constructing in Arizona, India and Germany, which will give us meaningful lease cost reductions and avoidance in the future as well as allow us to cost-effectively scale for our future growth. Depreciation expense in the September quarter was $29.9 million.
I will now ask Ganesh to give us comments on the performance of the business in the September quarter. Ganesh?
Ganesh Moorthy
Thank you, Eric, and good afternoon, everyone. We're very pleased with how our product lines performed in the September quarter with overall sequential revenue growth of 4.1% and year-over-year growth of 15.8%, all organic growth as there was no contribution from acquisitions in the last 4 quarters. The Microchip 2.0 transformation continues to make strong progress, especially in terms of new design opportunities as we enable our clients' innovation with the very best smart, connected and secure solutions.
Taking a closer look at microcontrollers. Our microcontroller business has performed strongly in the September quarter, with revenue being up 4.7% sequentially as compared to the June quarter, setting a new record in the process. On a year-over-year basis, the September quarter microcontroller revenue was up a very strong 20%. All microcontroller product lines, 8-bit, 16-bit and 32-bit, set new revenue records. Our microcontroller portfolio and roadmap has never been stronger, and we are seeing continued growth in our design end funnel, which we expect will drive future growth as these designs progress into production over time.
Microcontrollers at almost $2.7 billion in annualized revenue, represented 65.7% of Microchip's overall revenue in the September quarter. 
To put our recent performance into perspective, in the last 5 quarters, we have grown our annualized microcontroller revenue by over $0.5 billion. All our microcontroller product lines are firing on all cylinders and driving differential growth and market share gains. We believe we have the new product momentum and customer engagement to continue to gain even more share as we advance the Microchip 2.0 transformation and further strengthen the best-performing microcontroller franchise in the industry

Now moving to our analog business. Our analog revenue was sequentially flat in the September quarter as compared to the June quarter, and up 6.3% on a year-over-year basis and also set a new record by a whisker in the process. Our analog results over the last two quarters were negatively impacted by two factors, first, the back-end capacity constraints on products with Atmel heritage, which we discussed at the last earnings call, have taken more time to resolve as the lead time for new back-end equipment has been longer-than-expected, reflecting the strong industry conditions that our suppliers are also seeing; and second, we have been adding microcontroller cores to several of our more complex analog products, especially those that provide our clients with smart connectivity solutions.
This enables us to subsume competitive microcontrollers which were sitting next to our analog products as well, as include the connectivity firmware in our products so that they form total system solutions and are, therefore, much stickier design wins. These smart connectivity products are ramping nicely. And as they replace older products in new designs, our revenue classification for these new products has shifted from the analog product line to a microcontroller product line. 
Transitioning to more sticky and higher-margin smart connectivity revenue is the right Microchip answer, but does impact some of the product line reporting that analysts are interested in as some of the revenue growth shifts into our microcontroller product line. 
As our back-end capacity constraints continue to get relieved and the revenue from analog attach design wins start to ramp, we fully expect that the analog product line revenue will grow at or above Microchip's overall growth rate. 
At over $950 million in annualized revenue, our analog products represent a 23.6% of Microchip's overall revenue in the September quarter.
We continue to successfully find more opportunities to attach Microchip's vast portfolio of analog products to Atmel microcontrollers and microprocessors at multiple customers and applications. This effort should pay dividends over time as these new design wins go to production. And we are developing and introducing a wide range of new innovative and proprietary products in the linear, mixed signal, power, interface, timing and security products lines to fuel the future growth of our analog products as we march relentlessly towards making analog a greater than $1 billion annualized revenue business for Microchip soon and a much larger business in the coming years.
Moving next to our licensing business. This business is up 3% sequentially in the September quarter and up 8.9% on a year-over-year basis, also setting a new record in the process. We are seeing the fruits of having licensed several foundries and independent device makers for several years on multiple process technology nodes manifest in our results as the licensed processes generate royalty revenue for many years to come.
Last but not least, our memory business was sequentially up 5.3% in the September quarter as compared to the June quarter. There are significant cost reductions underway for this business using the combined strength of Microchip and Atmel. We believe that this effort will make us even more competitive and further improve our gross margins. 
Let me now pass it to Steve for some general comments about our business and our guidance going forward.
Steve?
Stephen Sanghi
Thank you, Ganesh, and good afternoon, everyone. Today, I would like to first reflect on the results of the fiscal second quarter of 2018. I will then provide guidance for the fiscal third quarter of 2018. I will also provide update on capacity enhancement activities, lead times as well as Microchip 2.0. Our September quarter financial results were extremely strong. Our net sales were a new record and above our guidance, first time ever our net sales crossed a very important milestone of being above $1 billion for the quarter. Our net sales for this quarter were up 15.8% from the September quarter of a year ago, and this revenue comparison is not impacted by any acquisition since Atmel's full quarter revenue was in the September 2016 quarter results.

Our non-GAAP gross margin percentage, operating profit percentage and earnings per share each exceeded the high end of our guidance. Non-GAAP earnings per share were up 50% from the September quarter of a year ago due to improving sales, gross margin percentage, operating expense leverage and successful execution of our core business as well as accretion from our acquisitions. I want to thank all the employees of Microchip worldwide for delivering a record quarter in every respect. This was also our 108th consecutive profitable quarter.
There are 3 other points I would like to make on our sales growth, first, every one of our major product lines, 8-bit MCU, 16-bit MCU, 32-bit MCU, analog, wireless, licensing, memory and others, were up significantly in the September 2017 quarter over the year-ago quarter; number two, every major geography, North America, Europe and Asia, were up significantly in the September 2017 quarter over the year-ago quarter; and number three, sales in all end-markets were up in September 2017 quarter over the year-ago quarter.
Now I will provide you with an update on Microchip 2.0. We are continuing to experience an enormous customer preference to design with our microcontrollers solutions in all 8-bit, 16-bit, and 32-bit customer applications. On top of that, our various acquisitions have now built a powerful diversified product line through which we're able to provide total system solutions to our customers. We are winning incremental design wins with multiple products in the same boards of our customers. We have a robust design win funnel, and we feel very optimistic that Microchip 2.0 is working and increasing the organic growth of Microchip.
A year ago, in September 2016 quarter, our microcontroller market share in 8-, 16- and 32-bit combined was 14.46% as per the SIA numbers. In September 2017 quarter, our market share is up to 15.84%, an increase of 138 bps in 1 year. 
Now before I go into the guidance for the December quarter, I will say that we are continuing to see good business environment for our products worldwide and have a number of company-specific demand drivers.
Our inventories at Microchip as well as the distributors are towards the low end of our normal range. We are continuing to slowly add incremental capacity at various bottlenecks. With that, our lead times have stabilized, with stable lead times we're engineering a soft landing so far without triggering any double ordering or panic from our customer base.
Our book-to-bill ratio has moderated from 1.11 in both March and June quarters to 1.05 in September quarter as the lead times stabilize. We expect the book-to-bill ratio to come down further as lead times continue to moderate, hence engineering and soft landing. At the rate we are adding capacity, we believe that it will still take us through June 2018 when our lead times return to fully normal.
Now let us go into the non-GAAP guidance for the December quarter. We expect total net sales in the December quarter to be about flat to down 4%, which, at the midpoint, represents a growth of approximately 12.6% on a year-over-year basis. I want to remind investors that in the last 5 years, we had 3 acquisitions that closed in the middle of September quarter. 
SMSC closed in August of fiscal year '13. ISSC closed in July of fiscal year '15, and Micrel closed in August of fiscal year '16. All these 3 acquisitions had a partial quarter revenue in September quarter and a full quarter revenue in the December quarter. Therefore, mathematically taking the average of the last 5 years of sequential growth would give you a false number.
Excluding acquisitions, the average sequential decline in the December quarter over the past 5 years has been 2.5%, and ranged between plus 0.8% and minus 4.9%. Investors should compare our guidance for December quarter of flat to down 4% with an average 5-year seasonal performance of minus 2.5% in net sales and against the backdrop of a 1% beat of our FQ2 revenue guidance.

Regarding gross margins, we see a steady improvement in overall gross margin of the company based on Microchip 2.0 margin drivers that we have discussed with the investors. We expect gross margin for the December quarter to be between 61% and 61.4% of sales. We expect overall operating expenses to be between 22.2% and 22.6% of sales, and we expect operating profit percentage to be between 38.4% and 39.2% of sales. And we expect earnings per share to be between $1.30 and $1.40 per share non-GAAP.
I want to remind investors that our long-term financial model is a non-GAAP gross margin of 62.5%, operating expense of 22.5% and operating profit of 40%. And as you have seen, we are relentlessly marching towards this model. And we expect our longer-term annual revenue growth to be high single-digits. 
We believe we can grow above the industry driven by four factors, we can achieve about 1% to 2% extra growth due to our traditional market share growth continuing; we can achieve an additional 1% to 2% growth due to higher attach rate from our total system solution approach; we can achieve 1% to 2% higher growth from much less ASP erosion or stable ASPs, and we can achieve 1% to 2% higher growth from our distributor partnership approach versus competitors pulling back. And we have judged it down due to confounding effects to yield a 7% to 9% growth going forward.
Given all the complications of accounting for the acquisitions, including amortization of intangibles, restructuring charges and inventory write-up on acquisitions, Microchip will continue to provide guidance and track its results on a non-GAAP basis. We believe that non-GAAP results provide more meaningful comparison to prior quarters, and we expect that the analysts continue to report the non-GAAP estimates to First Call.
With this, operator, will you please pool for questions?
Question-and-Answer Session
Operator
[Operator Instructions]. And we'll now take our first question from Vivek Arya with Bank of America Merrill Lynch.
Vivek Arya
Steve, if you look over the last year, growth has been very strong for you guys. Can you give us a sense of how much of that has been sort of company-specific? How much of that has been the macro? Because I think what most investors are trying to get a sense for is how much of this growth is actually sustainable as we look out into the near-to-intermediate term.
Stephen Sanghi
Well, it's very, very difficult. Customers don't have a good answer for -- that you're giving me this design. I'm winning this design. Is it because industry is doing well, or we are winning more than that? So that is a very, very hard to decipher. If you look at our last quarter, our year-over-year growth was 15.8%. We're not guiding to that. We're not expecting that. We're expecting a growth going forward of 7% and 9% with the December quarter guided at about 12.6% over the prior year December. So growth will moderate from these high numbers, and some of that excess is driven by the industry conditions.
Vivek Arya
All right. And as a follow-up, in the last few days, there's been a lot of M&A excitement in semis. And I'm wondering how you were thinking about M&A given that your leverage is at a very, very comfortable level. And at what point would you decide that it is better to resume buybacks instead of maybe going after assets that might be marked-up but with all the excitement in the industry?
Stephen Sanghi
Well, our capital allocation strategy and our thoughts have not changed since we discussed with all of you many times. Our first reference is to utilize our cash for our operations, R&D and other activities, but those are very well-funded into the P&L, and we do not need to really reach out into the balance sheet to spend excess cash. The second priority is to utilize our cash towards M&A. Our second priority is to maintain the dividend, keep growing its small amount incrementally, like we are, but not really have a very large incremental dividend program. Then our next priority is to utilize our cash for M&As. And our last priority is really to buy stock back, which we only do opportunistically.

Operator
And we'll now take our next question from John Pitzer with Credit Suisse.
John Pitzer
I guess, I just want to go back to the increase in the CapEx budget. Eric, you did, in your prepared comments, gave a sort of a good rundown of what's driving that. You did say there will be some cost savings because of that. I'm just kind of curious, does that put you sort of towards your target margin or above the target margin? And if you can help me understand what percent of the increase in CapEx is going because you just feel better about the demand, overall demand environment, versus bringing more stuff in-house?
James Bjornholt
Well, we've been talking about, for the last several quarters, there are a lot of margin improvement that we can get by bringing a lot of the outsourced Atmel activity in-house, and the percentages of our internal production versus where they've historically are out of line with where we'd like them to be. So we're making these incremental investments, and there are significant gross margins to come. We think that by making these investments, we can get to our 40% operating margins and the 62.5% gross margin goal. And it's gradual. These things come over a steady period of time. There's only so much our manufacturing and operations teams can do in any given quarter. But we've laid out a pretty aggressive plan for us to increase the production capabilities in-house, and the gross margin will improve from there.
John Pitzer
That's helpful. And then Steve, maybe as my follow-up, just to follow-on to Vivek's question about M&A. You've always been very disciplined about the price you're willing to pay for an asset. I think in the past, you've said, for every deal you've done, you've probably vetted and walked away from 3 or 4 deals. I'm just kind of curious. With Microchip 2.0 and your confidence level increasing that you can grow revenue faster than the industry, does that change the parameters around asset value you're willing to pay on the M&A front? And just given where the SOX index is now, any comment around asset value to your perception there would be helpful.
Stephen Sanghi
There is really no change. We have strong filters in place in our M&A analysis, which are multidimensional in terms of multiples and revenue and gross margin, operating profit growth rates and others. I can't give you all those filters, but it's a fairly complex metrics that we have to check off. And really, at various times, the assets available outside could be on the lower end of that metrics or could be on the higher end of the metrics. But they're always companies that fit the metrics. And if they go on the higher end of the metrics and even beyond that, and they're too expensive and we won't do it, but there are always companies available which still fall in the metrics.
Operator
And we'll now take our next question from Craig Hettenbach with Morgan Stanley.
Craig Hettenbach
Just a question on just the microcontroller share and as you tick through some of the things that should allow you to grow above the industry in high single-digit growth, any particular end-markets or product segments that you'd call out in terms of where you're seeing the best market share positioning?
Ganesh Moorthy
We don't go-to-market with an end-market view in order to be able to grow. We have a very broad approach to markets, applications, and a broad product line to go after them. Clearly, as the end markets strengthen in one area and other, we get participation incrementally from there. We've shown you how our automotive and industrial market share, when we presented it about 6 months ago, was that 60% of the overall revenue for us. And of course, those industries have been helping as they've had some strength. But we don't have a particular end-market that is driving us in one direction or another.

Craig Hettenbach
Got it. And then just a follow-up question for Steve. Appreciate all the color on some of the cyclical barometers around lead times and book-to-bill. As you try to kind of navigate to a soft landing, is there anything different in terms of this cycle versus prior cycles, whether it's competition with distributors and customers, inventory you're holding to kind of help navigate through that?
Stephen Sanghi
Well, I think, the lead times did not get as long this time as, clearly, they have gotten some other times. The customer behavior and the distributor behavior has been much more normal this time than we have seen in the other times. So I think everybody has behaved. We wrote a letter back in April informing our customers that the industry conditions were strengthening and the lead times are going out. In the March quarter, our book-to-bill ratio was 1.11. And we wrote the letter on April 4, after we had seen this very strong bookings. And in the June quarter, our book-to-bill was, again, 1.11, which means, really, there was no panic created. No customers rushed to place large orders. They kept doing what they were doing before the letter and conformed to our lead time and placed the orders to conform to the longer lead times. And then in December quarter, book-to-bill ratio came down to 1.05 as some of the products where the lead times have moderated, and the lead times right now are anywhere from 4 weeks to 20 weeks with the products all over the place. But the products where the lead times have become shorter, the bookings on them have moderated because people have the orders in place. So I think it's a much more behaved environment this time than kind of we have seen before. I do not know what's happening with the competitors and the rest of the industry. There are scattered cases where the customer isn't willing to take one of our products because he cannot complete the kit. There's a product coming from one of the competitors or other analogs or other companies where he needs to build his entire products. And if that one is not available, they don't want ours either. But same can be said by those competitors that one of our products wasn't available so their product didn't sell. But those are scattered cases. It's not all over the place. I think environment is pretty reasonable and reasonably well-behaved.
Operator
And we'll now take our next question from William Stein with SunTrust.
William Stein
You spoke in the prepared remarks about subsuming competitive microcontrollers when they're next to your analog products. It sounds almost like the cross-selling opportunity is being driven from analog to the digital MCU. I would have thought that the cross-selling opportunity was much more in the other direction. Can you elaborate on this, help us understand that dynamic a little bit?
Ganesh Moorthy
It happens in both directions. So in many cases where we have the microcontroller at the center of the design, we see the breadth of what else surrounds that microcontroller early and are able to attach products. There are some specific cases where it's very complex analog and especially when it's smart connectivity, where, in addition to the analog and the connectivity function, it needs a microcontroller. And we, in many cases, enter those businesses through some of the acquired entities. We didn't have our micro controllers there to begin with. But once we now see where we are on the analog from a smart connectivity standpoint, we can begin to see what else can we subsume. And that's where it goes in the opposite direction, where the strength that came from analog gives us the ability to attach microcontrollers and, in many cases, do an integrated product that gives us more complete total system solutions in that application.

William Stein
That's helpful. If I can squeeze in one follow-up. I just want to make sure -- it's really clarification point of the last question that someone else asked. It sounds like perhaps the shortages on the passive side have been sort of clipping overall demand. I think you mentioned a moment ago about if a customer can't get a complete kit because he's short, say, a capacitor and he doesn't want your product, at least not yet until he can do a full kit, did I understand that as sort of the dynamic that might have contributed to sort of soft landing where things didn't get out of hand because, let's say, passives or some other product clipped the peak demand rate?
Stephen Sanghi
So I don't know if the others are seeing a massive number of cases where they're not able to ship the product because some passive product is not available. I think I'm kind of just seeing it sporadically where it's not large enough that, that becomes an excuse, where a number, the one way or the other. I think it's a noise level, but it's certainly a factor. It's possible that, for some other people, it's a much larger factor.
Operator
And we'll now take our next question from Chris Caso with Raymond James.
Christopher Caso
I just want to talk a little bit about the efforts to build inventory and the timing of that. With demand slowing a bit seasonally in the December quarter, does that give you the ability to catch up on inventory somewhat? Or is that to wait until more capacity is in place a couple of quarters from now? And then with that, I have to imagine there's some gross margin benefit as you run the fabs a little harder to build the inventory. Can you quantify that benefit and talk about how that works its way into 2018?
Stephen Sanghi
So the way I will answer is, it's a continuous phenomenon. It is not digital where inventory doesn't grow this quarter, and a couple of years from now, it all grows to the right level. Our inventory grew by 5 days last quarter. Inventory will grow by some days this quarter and grow some again in March. And by June, we expect to try to get to the models. So it's a continuous phenomenon. In the stronger quarter, like we have had in the last 2 or 3 quarters, inventory was harder to grow because even though we added capacity, produced more units, we largely shipped them into the growth. Current quarter is seasonally a weak quarter, seasonally the weakest quarter of the year. So this quarter, the incremental capacity we're adding gives us the chance to add a little bit to the inventory because we can produce more than the weaker demand. But it's a continuous phenomenon. It's really not waiting for something to happen 2 quarters from now.
Ganesh Moorthy
The other thing to keep in mind is our distribution inventory is at the low end of their range as well. So us having a little extra inventory helps as we go into the growth quarters. So that combined, we have the right amount of inventory for the market.
Christopher Caso
And I'm sorry, the margin impact as the inventory is building?
Stephen Sanghi
So margin impact is essentially doesn't care about whether inventory is building or not. It cares about overall production. If you produce more in wafers assembly test, then it has better absorption and has an accretive effect. So we have been producing more units every quarter, and you have seen the margin going up every quarter. So that's also a continuous phenomenon.
Christopher Caso
Okay. As a follow-up, you had talked in your prepared remarks about a number of factors for why you think you grow faster than the inventory growing forward and what the impact would be. Can you talk about that looking backwards over the last year? And I know some factors are more difficult to measure than others. But perhaps give us a walk-through, perhaps some of these factors. And I think market share. You talked about, a little bit, pricing, how that may have affected your revenue growth over the last years compared to the industry, and what we'd say, Microchip 1.0, I guess.

Stephen Sanghi
Well, it's very difficult to numerically assign to the history and take our 15.8% growth last quarter over the previous 1 year and figure out what portion happened with price increase, what portion happened with gaining market share, what portion happened with what because it's impossible to do, 115,000-plus customers and 100,000 SKUs we are shipping. But the 4 elements that drove it in the last year and will continue to drive it going forward is really the traditional market share gains, better ASP management, either stable ASPs or increasing ASPs or less erosion. It depends on various product lines. And then achieving higher growth from our distributor partnerships, where a number of competitors are pulling back in their distribution programs, and distributions are focusing attention on us.
And the total systems approach where Ganesh talked about is happening both ways, we're able to win the microcontroller where we had a lot of analog parts by giving them a combined integrated part. And at the same time, where the customer doesn't want an integrated part, we're able to replace the competitor's analog because we have our micro end, so from both of those factors. When you combine it together, if you take 1% to 2% growth for those 4 factors, it kind of becomes 4% to 8% incremental, and we kind of have judged it down overall to come up with a 7% to 9% growth, counting the growth of the industry, whatever your assumptions are, plus a little bit more that we can do.
Operator
And we'll now take our next question from Chris Danely with Citi.
Christopher Danely
Steve, so you said that as the lead times are coming and the book-to-bill is dropping a little bit, is it possible that if the lead times dropped fairly suddenly in this quarter, that book-to-bill could be below 1 for the March quarter and you could potentially see some below-normal seasonality?
Stephen Sanghi
Well, we are not seeing it, and we're not expecting it because there's not big capacity increments coming in because the lead time for equipment is large. Many of the test equipment, fab and other equipment, there's a lot of semiconductors that go into them. So our equipment suppliers aren't able to produce the product. And their lead times are long because they can't acquire all the semiconductors they need. So there is not big bulk of capacity coming in. Capacity is coming incrementally. And that's why I said, I think it's -- capacity is coming incrementally, and lead times are moderating slowly. And that kind of all leads to a soft landing rather than a contraction.
Christopher Danely
Okay, great. And then for my follow-up. Okay, you're talking about 7% to 9% long-term growth, and like you said, analog slowed down to, like, I think it was 6% year-over-year growth. So would you expect the microcontroller business to grow faster than analog going forward? And what would be driving like a reacceleration on the analog revenue growth?
Stephen Sanghi
I think what drives the reacceleration in analog is Atmel acquisition was a little over a year ago. And usually, you have 1 year, 1.5 years design cycle. So with Atmel, we acquired a large amount of microcontroller business. I think it was about $600 million, $700 million of their business was microcontroller, which those sockets had 0 microchip analog around it. We were the enemy. So it was anybody's analog except ours. So that was a very, very large opportunity we identified for you. We are just in the front-end of it going to production. So I think that's what accelerates the analog. Don't be fooled by just last couple of quarters of lower analog growth because, in some cases, we were already producing the integrated product. It was analog with microcontroller. And we were able to sell the package to the customer. And therefore, the revenue shifted. Rather than putting it in the analog bucket, we've put it in the microcontroller bucket.

Ganesh Moorthy
We still have that analog. It's just it's coming in [indiscernible]
Stephen Sanghi
We still have that analog, but it's counted as part of the microcontroller revenue. 98%, 99% of our microcontroller has a large amount of analog on it. But the revenue still counts as a microcontroller revenue.
James Bjornholt
Right. Any product that we ship that has a microcontroller core, we classify as a microcontroller product.
Stephen Sanghi
That's not different for anybody. Our competitors do the same. All 32-bit micro, 16-bit, 8-bit micro, they all have some power management, converters, supervisors, LDOs. And analog is built into the microcontrollers. So that's why you saw -- and there were some large designs where we captured that, and it can depress that analog sequential growth for a couple of quarters. I will not be fooled by it. There's a large amount of analog attach rate coming around Atmel's microcontrollers soon.
Operator
[Operator Instructions]. We'll now take our next question from Harlan Sur with JPMorgan.
Harlan Sur
You were at your target OpEx ratio in the September quarter. You'll be there as well in the December quarter. Actually, a bit better than that. So clearly, you guys are continuing to drive OpEx leverage. And I think on a go-forward basis, I think the team is going to continue to drive revenue growth faster than OpEx growth. So is there a new OpEx ratio target that we should be thinking about?
Stephen Sanghi
We have not revised them, and we're not thinking of revising them. We believe our long-term target is 22.5%. In good times, we happen to be slightly below that. And in discretionary time in the future, we could be slightly higher than that by 25 bps or something. Basically, within the range. We're not calling for substantial OpEx leverage going forward. And if the times continue to be very, very strong and the growth happens to be well above the mean, you could temporarily be in that situation. But longer-term, we've got to make the investments to grow the business.
Harlan Sur
Okay. The team is clearly executing on the Microchip 2.0 initiatives, system-level focus, more content per board. You guys have a lot of analytics platforms in-house that tracks design wins, tracks content per board. It seems like this is a contributor to the strong year-over-year growth. Can you guys quantify content increase per board on a year-over-year basis? Or any other metrics that you use to gauge success in terms of value capture per system?
Stephen Sanghi
Well, we have a propriety indicator. We certainly don't want competitors or anybody else to know. So for the last several years, we have been tracking average number of Microchip's parts per customer design. And that is growing, and growing significantly. So that is the measure of the success of the TSS effort. We want to share that success with you qualitatively, not quantitatively.
Operator
And we'll now take our next question from Kevin Cassidy with Stifel.
Kevin Cassidy
Just within your microcontroller business, can you say which products are growing the fastest, both on units and revenue?
Stephen Sanghi
I would think 32-bit microcontrollers are growing the fastest, 16-bit microcontrollers next and 8-bit microcontroller next. Given that, all 3 are making record quarter-after-quarter.
Kevin Cassidy
Right. So not so much on a like-to-like basis. Your ASPs, in general, are trending up because you're selling more 32-bit.
Stephen Sanghi
That could be true if you just look at the average microcontroller ASP. But then the average COGS would be going up, too, because 32-bit products cost more to make it than 8 or 16.
Kevin Cassidy
Right. Yes. Just some investors are concerned about you outgrowing your end-markets. But if your end markets are shifting to higher ASP devices, then it justifies why you'd outgrow your end-market.

Stephen Sanghi
Yes. Okay.
Kevin Cassidy
No, just checking to see if you agree with that.
Stephen Sanghi
Yes. I agree with that.
Operator
And we'll now take our next question from Christopher Rolland with Susquehanna International Group.
Christopher Rolland
So your lead times have increased, but some others, like some European MCU guys, their lead times have expanded well beyond yours. So overall, do you think you guys have net gained or lost share because of competitive lead times in the industry?
Stephen Sanghi
Well, the numbers say we have gained share, and I've given you the numbers. The year-ago in the September quarter, our microcontroller revenue divided by SIA revenue was 14.46%. And in the September quarter that we are announcing today, our share was 15.84%. So that's an increase of 130 bps in 1 year. That's one of the significant increase in market share in 1 year. We used to gain that kind of share years ago. And lately, the gains have been slower. So this was a very significant increase. But I don't think the reason for the share gains is just because the competitive lead times have gone longer than ours. In microcontroller, you cannot gain the share like that.
You have to have design done with your product, which is 1.5 years, it takes to put your part in the design. So these were the designs we won 1 year ago, 2 years ago. The lead times of competitors does not have an effect on it. It may have effect onwards because we're winning more designs now, and some of the more designs we're winning today could be because customers are unhappy with their competitors. That will lead to higher share next year and the year after. But the share we gained last year had nothing to do with the lead time.
Christopher Rolland
I see. And then you guys had some interesting commentary, I thought, on the direct energy access provider in Oregon. I'm assuming maybe direct hydroelectric or something. What's the nearly $20 million upfront charge? And then what kind of benefit do we get, maybe gross margin or something like that, going forward from that?
James Bjornholt
So there's a transition fee that you have to pay when you make that change. And that fee essentially covers a 4- or 5-year period. And so from a cash flow perspective, the cash flow savings come at a later date. But the P&L, just with the way the accounting works, the income statement benefit will start getting that impact in our cost here over the next couple of quarters. And then it will get capitalized to inventory, and we'll get the benefit later. So there are incremental savings. That's a good change for us. We think it's going to drive better cost and better cash flow for us in the future. But essentially, it's a transition fee that were being paid, and that's why we have the onetime charge.
Christopher Rolland
And can you quantify at all? Or is it just too small?
James Bjornholt
It's too small in the big-picture overall gross margin.
Ganesh Moorthy
Clearly, it was good enough for us to be able to make a substantial investment, and it accrues for many, many years.
Stephen Sanghi
It will be 1 of our 3 fabs, plus 40% our business comes from foundries. I mean, it's one of the factor in gross margin, along with all the other drivers, which are more analog, higher yields, shrinks, taking Atmel products, bringing them in for assembly and test. And all of these other margin drivers we have talked to you about, this is kind of just one of them, but not really on the top of the list.
Operator
And we'll now take our next question from Gil Alexandre from Darphil Associates.
Gilbert Alexandre
In the past, you only use to go out to 1 quarter on giving results. And now you talked 7%, 9% gain, which is great. And I'll have to go through what you said in your last commentary. But what do you see? Is it just the addition of products that you sell which is giving your 7% to 9% gain? And how long does it continue like this?

Stephen Sanghi
So Gil, in the last conference call commentary, I had talked about high single-digit. And somewhere along on the investor circle, it got translated into 7% to 9%. But my exact words were high single-digit if you go back and listen to it. And I didn't disagree with that. High single-digit sounds like about 7% to 9% or somewhere there. In this conference call, I broke them into 4 different events, as I said earlier, which was traditional market share gains, TSS attach, distributor partnership approach, and I don't which was the fourth one.
Ganesh Moorthy
ASPs.
Stephen Sanghi
Stable ASPs or increasing ASPs. So when you said in the past, we only did not talk about long-term. We didn't have these 4 differentiated drivers. We didn't have a portfolio rich enough to drive the total system solution. A few years ago, we were not driving ASPs to be as stable or higher. Some of the industry consolidation as well as our own efforts have created the environment where you can keep the ASP stable. So things have changed. Years ago, our competitors were not pulling away from distribution. Today, they are. And we are approaching them, and they're putting more focus on it. So things have happened, which had given us the opportunity. And we're capitalizing on those opportunities so we're able to quantify and guide that we can grow higher. And the last part of your question was, how long does it continue? I don't know. I really don't know.
Operator
And we'll now take our next question from Mark Delaney with Goldman Sachs.
Mark Delaney
Congratulations on crossing that $1 billion mark with revenue. First question is actually on some of the proposed tax reform changes in the U.S. I guess, a couple of parts related to that topic. I know it's early, but any sense at this point what it may mean for Microchip's consolidated effective tax rate? And given the proposed rate for repatriating foreign cash, how is Microchip thinking about managing its overseas cash balance?
Stephen Sanghi
I think a general answer on that is that we haven't fully evaluated it. And proposed is just a proposal. A lot of other proposals that have come out on tax rate, health care and other, and not much has happened in Washington. And there's really not much reason to burn calories on it. I don't really know if there is support in Senate with a number of senators against anything that they want to do. So I think it's kind of too early. But if something were to happen, tax law were to change, we'll be upfront in fully understanding it, utilizing our foreign cash and thinking about all the possibilities that exist to take advantage of it and I think may add some more.
James Bjornholt
I think that's exactly right. It's too early. Our tax group and advisors are looking at what's being proposed. So we kind of have to see what actually comes to fruition here, and we'll respond accordingly.
Mark Delaney
That's helpful. And as for follow up on IoT. I know that's been a part of the company's growth strategy in the past. And I realized, Microchip has a more stringent criteria over what counts as IoT versus not IoT. But maybe if you can just level for us at this point how much revenue you think is tied to IoT and what your outlook is for that part of the business.
Ganesh Moorthy
We haven't broken out IoT as a revenue segment. We have done it a couple of times in the past just to provide some more insight at that point. The strategy for the company that we've explained is around providing smart connector and secure solutions. And all of what IoT requires are those 3 big ingredients. And a large chunk of our product line today is feeding the requirements of what would be classified as IoT. So it is a growth driver for us. We see a lot more applications that are building the connected and the secure capabilities. And we have the strong product line to be able to take advantage of that. But unfortunately, I don't have a good way to estimate the IoT-specific revenue.

Operator
And we'll now take our next question from John Pitzer with Credit Suisse.
John Pitzer
Eric, just going back to the CapEx. If you look with the raise that you guys announced today, it puts your CapEx to rev over 5% for this fiscal year. It has historically run at sort of 4% to 4.5%. Should we expect CapEx to come back down to that range in fiscal year '19? Or how do we think about the long-term target for CapEx?
James Bjornholt
So you're right. The percentage is higher. And we mentioned in our prepared remarks that we have 3 buildings in Chandler, India and Germany that were -- that are kind of, I'll call them, onetime items to help with future lease cost or avoidance of lease cost. So that's one thing. And the other piece is we've got all the Atmel products that were outsourced historically, where we can get very fast return on those investments from a cash flow payback perspective that were -- that it's very much worthwhile from gross margin perspective to make those investments. And those are bit out of the ordinary. So we don't expect, long-term, to be at the 5% rate, but the investments that we're making today definitely are worthwhile and cost-beneficial. So hopefully, that's the color that you're looking for.
Operator
And we'll now take our next question from Craig Ellis with B. Riley FBR.
Craig Ellis
Steve, I wanted to follow-up with the earlier comments regarding some of the company-specific drivers to the high single-digit growth. You mentioned lower ASP declines, distribution, analog attached and traditional share gain. My question is, as we look at those 4 company drivers for Microchip, is the company getting optimal benefit from each of those right now? Or are there things that are more formative or early innings that would give us more benefit next year? And if so, what are they?
Ganesh Moorthy
Yes. I think he's trying to kind of figure out which are more fully baked in, which ones coming in time. I would say, when you look at TSS, the gains from TSS are going to be accruing as we go into in that coming 1, 2 years of time. Those are typically design-driven. It takes complete design cycle from when we begin to engage, are able to attach and those attached designs to go to production. So I think that's one of the larger ones ahead. Clearly, some of the changes in distribution took place within the last year. That change in engagement, again, takes time. It's new designs that you're affecting, I think. So I think the best of what's to come is ahead of us from some of the changes that Steve described.
Operator
And we'll now take our next question from Rajvindra Gill with Needham & Company.
Rajvindra Gill
Steve, you had mentioned -- or Ganesh, sorry, you mentioned your smart connectivity strategy. And obviously, you talked about attach rates for analog increasing as a drive for overall growth. Can you talk about a little bit -- if you can maybe quantify where we are in terms of the attach rates maybe for the Atmel products? And kind of where do you expect that to go in the future?
Ganesh Moorthy
Qualitatively, it's still low because when we inherited the Atmel product lines and those designs with our customers, they didn't have much microchip attached in them. Now our sales teams and our overall microchip teams have been working on new designs as they come up to be able to showcase the rest of the Microchip product line and to increase that attach. Now we can see the leading indicators in how we see our own design-in activity. Some of the indicators Steve talked about, which is as we measure the rate of attach that's taking place over time. And so in the revenue numbers themselves, they are still yet to come, especially on the Atmel part of the product line. And there may be small things that have taken place. But as time goes on, all these designs, as they go through the 12- to 24-month incubation period, start to go into production, and that's when you begin to see the growth and the revenue that comes from that attach.

Rajvindra Gill
And just a follow-up. So is it fair to assume of that $600 million of Atmel microcontroller revenue that they've generated, that over that design period, whether it's 24 months or more, that a certain percentage of that will start to be attached with the microcontroller core? Can you maybe talk about what the adversive effect on the ASPs would be?
Ganesh Moorthy
So in general, when you look at the dollars per board, we're driving towards increasing the dollar content per board. So attach is taking place, as we mentioned earlier, in 2 ways. And one way, it is where we have the microcontroller. Ours or what came to us through the Atmel acquisition. In that case, the microcontroller is still the microcontroller that Microchip or Atmel had been shipping, but that incremental dollar content of the board. And the other way is where, if we have some of the richer analog product lines, and they don't always come from Atmel, only they come from some of our older acquisitions as well, where we are now providing a higher integration solution, a microcontroller with that analog, perhaps with security, something else onboard. Now those products, the ASP will go up because more often than not, we didn't own the microcontroller portion of that design. We have the analog portion and we are subsuming other people's silicon with our new products. And there, the ASP, we do expect and we do see going up.
Operator
And it appears there are no further questions in the queue at this time. And at this time, I would like to turn the conference back over to Chief Executive Officer, Steve Sanghi, for any additional or closing remarks.
Stephen Sanghi
Well, we want to thank everyone for joining the call. I think the next conference we go to is CSFB.
James Bjornholt
Credit Suisse.
Stephen Sanghi
Yes, which is in our backyard here in Scottsdale. So we'd love to see you, all of you, at the conference. Thank you very much.
Operator
And ladies and gentlemen, that concludes today's conference call. We thank you for your participation.Silicon Laboratories, Inc. (NASDAQ:SLAB) Q2 2018 Earnings Conference Call July 25, 2018  8:30 AM ET
Executives
Jalene Hoover - Director of Investor Relations and International Finance
John Hollister - Chief Financial Officer 
George Tuttle - Chief Executive Officer
Analysts
Cody Acree - Loop Capital Markets
Matt Ramsay - Cowen
Gary Mobley - Benchmark
Blayne Curtis - Barclays
Craig Ellis - B. Riley FBR
Raji Gill - Needham & Company
Suji Desilva - ROTH Capital
Tore Svanberg - Stifel
Operator
Good morning. My name is James, and I will be your conference operator today. At this time, I'd like to welcome everyone to the Silicon Labs Second Quarter Fiscal 2018 Earnings Conference Call. At this time, all lines have been placed on mute to prevent any background noise. After the speakers' remarks there will be a question-and-answer session. [Operator Instructions]
Thank you. I will now turn the call over to Jalene Hoover, Director of Investor Relations and International Finance. Jalene, please go ahead.
Jalene Hoover
Thank you, James and good morning everyone.
Tyson Tuttle, Chief Executive Officer and John Hollister, Chief Financial Officer are on today's call. We will discuss our financial performance and review our business activities for the second quarter. After our prepared comments we will take questions. Our earnings press release and the accompanying financial tables are available in the Investor Relations section of our website at www.silabs.com. This call is also being webcast and a replay will be available for four weeks.
Our comments today will include forward-looking statements subject to risks and uncertainties. We base these forward-looking statements on information available to us as of the date of this conference call and assume no obligation to update these statements in the future. We encourage you to review our SEC filings, which identify important risk factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements.
Additionally, during our call today we will make reference to certain non-GAAP financial information. A reconciliation of our GAAP to non-GAAP results is included in the company's earnings press release and also in the Investor Relations section of Silicon Labs website.
I would now like to turn the call over to Silicon Labs' Chief Financial Officer, John Hollister.
John Hollister
Thanks Jalene. I'm pleased to report that we achieved record revenue of $217 million in the second quarter, up 14% year-on-year and at the high-end of our guidance range. Our opportunity pipeline has grown to more than $9 billion and in Q2 we saw record design win activity. 
Strong revenue performance combined with favorable gross margin allowed us to deliver non-GAAP EPS in excess of our guide at $0.92, up 16% year-on-year. Our IoT products generated a new all-time record of $116 million for the quarter, which is about 19% growth year-on-year. This includes a partial quarter contribution from Z-Wave that was in line with expectations at approximately $8 million.
Apart from Z-Wave, we saw strength in sales of MCUs, sensors and proprietary wireless partially offset by weakness in 15.4 products due to delays in some large customer rounds, including a pause in the UK smart metering roll out. We had another outstanding quarter in our infrastructure products with quarterly revenue exceeding $50 million for the first time ending at $52 million and exceeding expectations.
This represents year-on-year growth of 35% well ahead of our long-term strategic growth target. Strong performance in both timing and isolation contributed to these results. Broadcast declined to $34 million down 7% year-on-year. Broadcast consumer was flat for the quarter with automotive down. Access declined as expected for the quarter ending at $15 million with a portion of the decline attributable to the US ban on shipments to ZTE.

Distribution revenue in Q2 was approximately 71% of total sales. Our top 10 customers represented less than 20% of total first-half revenue with no customer greater than 5%. Geographically, strong performance in IoT and infrastructure drove robust growth in the Americas with declines in Europe on infrastructure and broadcast automotive. APAC declined slightly with growth in IoT and isolation offset by declines in timing and broadcast. 
By end market strength in home automation and security, including the addition of Z-Wave and combined with strong performance from isolation drove increases in industrial, which has grown to more than 50% of total revenue. Communications were slightly up on strength and timing and declines in broadcast drove reductions in automotive.
Consumer was also down. Second quarter non-GAAP gross margins were outstanding at 61.6% driven by favorable product mix particularly due to strong contributions from our infrastructure products. Non-GAAP operating expenses increased in the quarter to $88 million, which was somewhat higher than we expected. Non-GAAP R&D expenses were $47 million, up about $3 million due to headcount increases from the Z-Wave acquisition, as well as higher new product introduction costs.
Non-GAAP SG&A expenses were $41 million, also up about $3 million, due to greater salary and bonus costs on headcount increases and stronger than expected financial results, combined with higher travel expense. Second quarter non-GAAP operating margin was 21.2%, which is 70 basis points higher than in Q2 2017.
I'm pleased to report that this concludes our fifth consecutive quarter of posting target model operating performance for revenue, gross margin and operating margin. Our non-GAAP effective tax rate was stable at 11% and our non-GAAP EPS was $0.92, which was above our guidance range due to upside revenue and strong gross margins.
On a GAAP basis, second quarter gross margins were 60.5%. Total Q2 GAAP operating expenses increased to $113 million with R&D expenses at $59 million and SG&A expenses at $54 million. GAAP EPS ended at $0.32. Stock compensation was in line at $12 million and we saw an expected increase in the amortization of intangible assets to $10 million due to the acquisition of Z-Wave.
Turning now to the balance sheet, we ended the quarter with cash and investments of $548 million, which reflects a $240 million reduction from Q1 due to the cash purchase of Z-Wave. Our accounts receivable balance increased to $94 million on 39 days sales outstanding, and our inventory balance increased to $87 million on turns of about 4 times. Please note that accounts receivable and inventory reflect acquired Z-Wave balances and that the inventory number includes about a $4 million increase due to the fair market valuation of Z-Wave inventory, which we expect to fully turn around in Q3.
Most of our $100 million share repurchase authorization remains outstanding with some buyback activity completed in Q2. Year-to-date 2018 operating cash flow was $51 million and reflects the above-mentioned increases in working capital. We expect to see stronger cash flow performance in the second half.
Before turning to guidance, I would like to report on the Z-Wave integration progress. We have fully integrated Z-Wave into our operational systems and flows and this process has gone very smoothly. Through many acquisitions over the years the Silicon Labs team has developed robust processes to identify key data, onboard and train new employees, work with new factory partners, comprehend opportunities for synergies and develop coordinated technology strategies.
On the operational side, the time required for us to execute required integration steps is measured in days and weeks, which we believe has become a core competency. We have spent much time over these past months at our new Copenhagen, Denmark location. The Z-Wave team is happy to be with us and we are thrilled to have them onboard.

I will now cover guidance for the third quarter, which reflects a full quarter of the acquired Z-Wave business. We expect revenue to be in the range of $224 million to $230 million, with IoT, infrastructure and broadcast up, and access down. We expect non-GAAP gross margin to be approximately 60%, and we expect non-GAAP OpEx to be between $87 million and $88 million.
We expect our non-GAAP effective tax rate to be around 11%, and we expect non-GAAP EPS to be in the range of $0.95 to $1.01. On a GAAP basis, we expect gross margin to be approximately 58.5% with some impact from the $4 million fair market valuation of Z-Wave inventory recorded in Q2. We expect GAAP OpEx to be around $111 million, and GAAP EPS to be in the range of $0.40 to $0.46. This reflects an estimated $13 million in stock compensation and $11 million in amortization of intangible assets, including a full quarter for Z-Wave.
Please note that the GAAP guidance I have just provided does not comprehend any adjustments that may arise out of the Altera Tax ruling from yesterday. The company is currently evaluating the impact of this decision and such effect could be material to our financial statements.
Before I turn the call over to Tyson I would like to comment on recent activity involving tariffs. We do not believe that the US government’s tariffs and acted on imports from China thus far will have a significant direct effect on our financials. We will continue to monitor and evaluate the possible impacts of additional tariffs that are being proposed.
Given that most of our manufacturing activity is outside of China we believe that we are well positioned relative to our competition. That said global supply-chains in the electronics and industrial markets are tightly interconnected and we remain vigilant as we comprehend potential broader in-direct implications of trade restrictions with China.
I will now turn the call over to Tyson.
George Tuttle
Thanks, John. We're very pleased to report outstanding second quarter 2018 financial performance, including more than 14% year-on-year revenue growth. Record performance in IoT and infrastructure drove top line growth and now represents 80% of total revenue.
Our diversified product portfolio with more than 50% of revenue derived from industrial markets is driving greater consistency and financial results. IoT is our largest market opportunity and now represents more than half of total revenue. Our connectivity portfolio continues to gain traction as we target low power wireless applications with a broad range of protocols and a common hardware and software platform.
We are well positioned to extend our leadership as a supplier of silicon, software and solutions for IoT end nodes. In Q2, we completed the purchase of Sigma Designs of Z-Wave business. Z-Wave is a proven broadly deployed mesh networking technology for the smart home with more than 100 million devices shipped to date.
This strategic acquisition complements Silicon Labs’ comprehensive wireless hardware and software portfolio, drives collaboration while expanding access to a diverse set of ecosystem partners including ADT, Alarm.com, Amazon and Ring, Comcast, Google Home, Samsung SmartThings, Vivant, and Yale, and significantly strengthens our position in the smart home market. Z-Wave’s focus on product interoperability, advanced security and ease of deployment combined with Silicon Labs’ Wireless Gecko platform and multiprotocol expertise offers a great opportunity to enhance our combined roadmaps.
We believe having multiple connectivity standards under one roof strengthens our influence on the evolution and adoption of wireless standards in targeted IoT market segments. Combining multiple capabilities under the same platform, developing our own standards-based wireless protocols rather than licensing stacks from third parties and optimizing our hardware and software to work seamlessly together are all examples of how we differentiate ourselves from the competition.

Silicon Labs’ unique platform approach to supporting thousands of IoT applications is resonating with our customer base enabling them to reuse more hardware and software in ways not possible with single point solutions. We see the proliferation of innovative platform-based customer designs across the IoT especially in industrial applications.
Many of our customers leverage their investments through efficient reuse, amplifying the stickiness of the software element of our platform solution and contributing to R&D efficiency. Proprietary sub-gigahertz wireless protocols are widespread in smart energy, industrial and commercial applications including metering, lighting and home and building automation. During the quarter, we released new software for our Wireless Gecko portfolio, which enables dynamic switching between sub-gigahertz networks and bluetooth low energy on a single chip.
Silicon Labs’ new solution makes it easier to set up, control and monitor a wide range of sub-gigahertz wireless IoT devices in the field through bluetooth and easy-to-use mobile apps on smart phones, while speeding time-to-market and reducing [bond], cost and size by up to 40%.
Moving onto infrastructure, second-quarter revenue surpassed $50 million with records in both timing and isolation. Timing enjoyed continued broad share gains in Q2 with participation in the communications end market flat sequentially. We see growing diversity in our customer base beyond core optical networking and into industrial, data center and wireless infrastructure applications with the development of new timing standards resulting from a migration to faster data rates.
Faster speeds drive demand for higher performance timing products, which plays to our core strength and leadership position in clocks and oscillators. Leading manufacturers are migrating to 56G SerDes technology to support higher bandwidth Ethernet and optical networking designs. During the quarter Silicon Labs became the first timing supplier to provide a fully integrated, single device clock IC solution for 56G in emerging 112G SerDes designs.
We offer the industry's broadest portfolio of frequency flexible, ultra low jitter timing devices for the latest communications in data centers, designs scaling from to 100G to 600G. Isolation products represent one of our fastest growing and most diversified product lines. In Q2, isolation delivered record design win activity with strength across a broad range of applications including power supplies, solar, industrial and automotive.
We are the number one supplier of digital isolation technology for electric and hybrid electric vehicles, which is the fastest growing component of isolation revenue. Our digital isolation products continue to replace traditional optic couplers enabling higher performance, reliability and integration for designs requiring protection from high voltages.
Before closing, I want to congratulate Daniel Cooley for his new role as Senior Vice President and Chief Strategy Officer. Daniel will focus on Silicon Labs’ overall growth and M&A strategy, business development, new technologies in emerging markets. Under Daniel’s leadership we have grown IoT to more than half of our total revenue. I look forward to Daniel’s continued impact on Silicon Labs’ success.
I'm also delighted to welcome Matt Johnson to Silicon Labs leadership team. As Senior Vice President and General Manager of IoT Products, Matt has a proven track record with more than 15 years in the semiconductor industry most recently at NXP Freescale, where he served as SVP and general manager of NXP’s automotive MCU and processor product lines and software.
With these executive appointments we are expanding our ability to execute on large and growing market opportunities in the IoT and infrastructure. Together these two talented leaders will help Silicon Labs scale the business to the next level.

We continue to focus on long-term, high quality strategic growth vectors, including IoT, green energy and data communications. The insatiable demand for data will persist. The electrification of the world will accelerate and the value in connecting things will increase exponentially. The diversity of our business supports strong fundamentals and is driving greater consistency in our results, and we are very pleased with what we have accomplished and even more excited about what lies ahead.
I would like to turn the call back to Jalene. Jalene?
Jalene Hoover
Thank you, Tyson. Before we open the call for the question-and-answer session, I would like to announce our participation in upcoming conferences, including KeyBanc Capital Markets 20th Annual Technology Leadership Forum in Vail on August 13th, and Citi’s Global Technology Conference in New York on September 5th.
We would now like to open up the call up for your questions. To accommodate as many people as possible before the market opens, we ask that you please limit your questions to one with one follow-up.
James?
Question-and-Answer Session
Operator
[Operator Instructions] Your first question comes from the line of Cody Acree from Loop Capital Markets. Go ahead please. Your line is open.
Cody Acree
Thanks for taking my question. Congrats on the progress. John, just a quick housekeeping, beyond Q3 can you give us any help on what you are thinking about acquisition, amortization related charges?
John Hollister
Yes, Cody. The third-quarter guide is a reasonable view on that looking forward certainly over the next couple of years. So that is a good benchmark to use for you going forward. This would give us a full quarter of amortization on the Q3 GAAP guide.
Cody Acree 
Okay, great. And Tyson, just maybe if you could give us any more details on your infrastructure business, just visibility into the data center and optical networking, obviously that has been a bit lumpy, but it seems to be doing better I guess, can you kind of breakdown some of the drivers and visibility you are seeing?
George Tuttle
Yes. I mean, we delivered 5% sequential growth 35% year-on-year. And that’s both records in timing and isolation.
I means, some of the trends we’ve seen, we had a bit of a pause on the timing business. Last year it was the overall infrastructure product group was up 7% which was a little bit below our long terms 10% strategic growth target. And that was really the optical market down. We saw a stable optical market in Q1 and now in Q2 and see that persisting.
What’s really driving the growth on the timing side has been industrial, datacentre, wireless areas outside the core, core optical market while we’ve been investing quite a bit at recent years. And that’s being driven by and a lot these and datacentres and in the wireless, the drive to higher data rate applications and our parts have very good performance and specs and features to address that market.
So, in timing we’ve seen really the investments that we’ve been making pay off. In isolation it’s we’ve been consistently growing it’s a very broad and diverse business. We’ve got a lot of business in power supply, solar inverters and seeing a growing presence in the electric vehicle market. That’s becoming a larger piece.
And so, that’s been a very consistent multiyear performance in the study growth all the way through. So, we’re really happy about the performance and infrastructure in Q2 and see those trends continuing.
Cody Acree
Thank you very much, alright.
Operator
Your next question comes from the line of Matt Ramsay from Cowen. Go ahead please, your line is open.
Matt Ramsay
Thanks very much. Good morning, everybody. Tyson, maybe you could talk a little bit about the IoT business sort of near terms organic growth trends. The long term strategic target is 20% I believe and obviously the results looked really good with the integration of Z-Wave. But if I backed that out, I think on 10% or 11% year-over-year organic.

And maybe you could just talk about the near term trend there versus the longer term growth objective is sort of what you’re seeing is maybe some near term pauses or headwinds in the business and how that might reaccelerate as we get into the back half of this year and next year. Thank you.
George Tuttle
Sure. We had 9% year-on-year growth; that includes just little bit less than $8 million from Z-Wave. So, if you back that out, it’s about an 11% year-on-year growth with that, which is below the 20% target. We also had a little bit light organic growth in the first quarter and those trends persisted into the second quarter with some delays and higher volume customers that we were planning on kind of moving out into the second half and even into Q4.
We also had a transition in the U.K. the smart emerging leader in market. There’s a first generation platform moving to a second generation platform and we expect that to resume shipping in higher volumes in late Q4 or early 2019. So, we see those two big things really responsible for a bit of the slowdown.
We’ve seen very strong performance in MCUs. That’s been a single digit grow or as we’ve seen devices move over to the more integrated wireless products. We’ve seen continued if you look year-on-year, we’ve been growing the wireless business 30% 40% and we see continued strength on the opportunity pipeline around the wireless applications.
If you look at the design win activity in the quarter, we had a record design win activity. It was up 30 plus 38% year-on-year for last year. And so, we look into the second half and particularly as we move into 2019 and we stand behind our 20% strategic long term growth target. That is, every year you know last year infrastructure was a little behind, this year we’re a little ahead there in the organic growth.
And in IoT, we see the design win pipeline supporting that 20% strategic growth target. It may be lumpy based on a few customer ramps and things like that. I think if you look at the CAGR from 2014 to 2017 and your included proforma Z-Wave, you’ve got about a 24% CAGR that we’ve achieved during the last three years. That’s inclusive of the historical Z-Wave.
And so, going forward we think both on a proforma and in organic basis the 20% is the reason we’ll target it.
Matt Ramsay
Got you, thanks. That’s really helpful. John, just a couple of things for yourself. With the higher mix in infrastructure I mean it’s that 60% growth margin number. It that sort of a sustainable level. And second, there is how do you see operating expense trending and are we going to get a point after a couple quarters of Z-Wave integration while we turn to similarly strong leverage or how do you think about spending? Thank you.
John Hollister
Yes, Matt. So, looking at the gross margin, we had very strong results in the second quarter with a 61.6% gross margin. We saw a strength in infrastructure; we saw a consumer down on that in second quarter. That’s total consumer end market and also some favourable mix effects in IoT. So, that was a good result. Looking ahead, we see 60% in third quarter as our guidance.
We’re holding our model at a 58% to 60% and think that continues to be a rationale way to view the business. IoT coming and that below corporate average as those volumes headed to a stronger ramp coming ahead. We think holding the models the right way to view that. Looking at the OpEx, we get guiding basically flat off. That’s in the third quarter was some French costs to continue to roll off in third quarter with some additional headcount activity.
Looking into the fourth quarter, we see likely an uptick of bits in the OpEx for fourth quarter and that to the tune of up to a couple of million dollars for fourth quarter. And that puts us close very much in line with the annual guide we’d given on OpEx at the beginning of this year. Matt, longer term heading into next year, we will be talking about this in our AOP planning cycle that now begins this fall.

And I expect we would be in position to talk more about 2019 as we head into the early part of next year.
Matt Ramsay
Fair enough. Well done, thank you.
John Hollister
Thank you.
Operator
Your next question comes from the line of Gary Mobley from Benchmark. Go ahead please, your line is open.
Gary Mobley
Thanks. Good morning, everybody. Had a question about ZTE. If I recall correctly, your expectation was for you did miss about $2 million in revenue relating to ZTE in the second quarter. Now that we’ve seen some easing at the shipment ban, what’s your expectation for business for ZTE looking into the third quarter?
And was there any benefit from the migration from ASC 605 to 606 at least on the year-over-year comp basis.
John Hollister
Yes Gary. This is John. Taking the first question. The ZTE ban has been lifted and we are engaging with ZTE to determine their resumption of production activity and consumption rates. So, that is comprehended in our 3rd quarter guidance that we provided this morning. Relevant to the change in the accounting methodology, yes there is some beneficial effect of that and that has incorporated in our second quarter results as well.
Gary Mobley
Okay, thank you guys.
Operator
Your next question comes from the line of Blayne Curtis from Barclays. Go ahead please, your line is open.
Blayne Curtis
Hey guys, thanks for taking my question. Maybe just a follow-up on the gross margin and so I was largely curious I mean you said a mix within IoT. Is that just a module that’s it or are you seeing some benefit on a product basis and just kind of curious as you look at the Z-Wave and improvement in the gross margin structure there as well. Thanks.
John Hollister
Yes. There is a fair amount of mix within IoT. It’s a broad product base with you know, product and customer mix effects across what is now a $100 million per quarter plus type business. So yes, we’ll see some fluctuation within that from time to time. Z-Wave integration is proceeding smoothly including looking for opportunities for manufacturing synergies and we will continue to optimize that as we go forward here.
Blayne Curtis
Thank you. And this question --.
George Tuttle
I can add then on with the strength in the proprietary wireless side, that’s also an area that is higher on the gross margin. So, that lend a little bit of favorability as well.
Blayne Curtis
Thanks. And then a question for you Tyson, just as more strategic nature. A question I get it most is when you look out over the next couple of year in home automates and why Bluetooth wouldn’t eventually win out. Obviously you have Bluetooth capabilities, we’re thinking such. But just curious, it’s like the Z-Wave.
Now, what is the pitch there for customer to continue to use that technology versus something like Bluetooth which is more ubiquitous?
George Tuttle
Yes. So, Bluetooth is more of a point-to-point solution and is really the gateways in Bluetooth typically involve a smartphone. So, whereas a ZigBee or a Z-Wave device would have a gateway connected to the internet and would be kind of more of an autonomous network.
It’s also a mesh network. So, there is a higher level of maturity and robustness to those that many of the operators and service providers have chosen these mesh networking technologies and we see those only solidifying their position in the U.S. and in Europe.
There is quite a bit of interest in China in particular around the Bluetooth mesh technology and we were the first company to launch a Bluetooth mesh stack and are heavily engaged in the China market around Bluetooth mesh and see that as a very interesting solution. And given that we have a common hardware and software platform and we can run these protocols on the same hardware essentially and even are able to run Bluetooth and ZigBee. And in the future, Bluetooth and Z-Wave on the same device that will bring in new use cases.

And some of the advantages that you would see in Bluetooth into the other mesh networking technologies. It also drives a higher level of efficiency for us because we are writing all of the stacks and making them interoperate on the same platform. So, I think that IoT is a very broad market. It’s 1000s of applications, lots of different end devices, lots of customers and you see a diversity of technologies across those.
So, I think the fact that we can support the variety of technologies on a common platform is no matter which way the market goes and which application in particular protocol a particular customer wants we’re able to support that.
So, we feel like we’re quite well positioned no matter which way the market goes.
Blayne Curtis
Thanks.
Operator
Your next questions comes from the line of Craig Ellis from B. Riley FBR. Go ahead please, your line is open.
Craig Ellis
Yes, thanks for taking the question and congratulations on the strong execution, guys. Tyson, I wanted to go back to some of the comments in your prepared remarks regarding infrastructure. I think you said that timing head strength and its non-communications businesses and I wanted to just follow-up on that put some more color.
And with respect of isolation, it had been historic over last year. It looks like it’s continuing that same track record. Can you provide a little bit of a look ahead and give us a view of what isolation could look like as we look into 2019 and what the incremental drivers are longer term.
George Tuttle 
Right. So, if you look at the infrastructure business, let’s peel into part and just talk first about timing. We’ve got a very broad portfolio of oscillators and clocks. And as communication standards and datacentre and wireless as we move into 5G, there is a need for a higher data rate speeds that really require the high performance that we’re kind of famous for.
And what we’ve got patented technology that allows us to achieve a high level of integration; a high level of functionality and very low jitter which is critical with these application. So, that’s been really in the optical market where we’re seeing higher performance requirements, that’s where we had initial success and in timing and now that’s being extended into these applications through the lot of the NPI pipeline that we’ve been driving here over the last five years.
So, that’s finally starting to take hold. I would add that the stickiness and these are very high quality long live high gross margin products and applications and we’re really pleased with the progress that we’re making there.
On the isolation side, this is a probably to one of our if not our most broad business there’s just a broad range of industrial applications and empower basically dealing with high power, high voltage type systems where traditionally customers have used optic couplers that’s mainly provided by companies like Avago or Broadcom now.
And there has been a trend towards moving these to a digital isolation which requires gives you a higher degree of performance, higher robustness, and higher channel counts. It lets you build higher efficiency power supplies and higher efficiency motors. And then you see a lot of new emerging applications like electric vehicles which use similar technology.
Solar invertors those use similar technology. So, there is and this is it’s been a multi-year performance. I mean, we’ve been growing this business from what were small numbers to now it’s about bit over 40% of the infrastructure businesses on the isolation side. I would say the isolation products are growing a little faster than timing although we’ve seen a really strong performance out of timing here over the last couple of quarters as well.
We had records in both of those areas and certainly on the isolation side we see no let-up in the growth that we’re able to achieve there. Just a very strong design win pipeline record design wins in both timing and isolation here in the second quarter which moved well for going forward.

That being said, we stand behind our 10% strategic growth target for the infrastructure market. Timing has been lumpy based on market conditions and roll out the various standards. If you look back over the last three years, we had a 12% CAGR for the infrastructure business and timing was down in 2017.
So, we still remain conscious but very optimistic about the positioning of our products in the market.
Craig Ellis
And that’s very helpful. And then, the follow-up question is most of a financial question and more about the organizational lend and corporate implications of the chief strategy officer moved.
That was announced, so congratulations to Daniel. But what does it mean that for financials longer term, the evolution of the business that is moving into a chief strategy officer role and how do you expect to tap the expertise of that role as we look at the financial performance of the business going forward?
John Hollister
And so, as IoT has become a larger percentage of our business, very complicated; lots of customer activity; lots of product development; lots of software. We felt that augmenting our team with someone with operating at a larger scale and with experience in microcontrollers and software development and all of that was the judicious thing to do; growing the bench strength of the team.
Daniel he’s had a great run at running the IoT business. He’s got a deep understanding of the company’s strategy of what’s made us successful in IoT. And I expect him to acquire that those capabilities and that knowledge more broadly across the company as we look at the infrastructure opportunity sitting in front of us as we drive for continued growth and leadership on the IoT side.
And then also, we’ve got a target to execute on M&A that we’ve got $500 million and some in the bank and we want to make sure we put the proper level of diligence and focus on growing the business that way as well. So, I’m really looking forward to working with Daniel more closely and also really delighted that Matt has joined the team and really well positioned to take the IoT business to the next level.
Craig Ellis
Thanks, and good luck.
John Hollister
Thank you.
Operator
Your next question comes from the line of Raji Gill from Needham & Company. Go ahead please, your line is open.
Raji Gill
Yes, thanks. And congrats as well. Tyson, a question on the IoT to piggy back on the different kind of competing connectivity standards. What are your views on 802.11ac as well as the next generation 802.11ax which is both more range higher data throughput?
Do you view that as a potential competitive threat to imagine that working or are you incorporating these new Wi-Fi technologies in your portfolio? Any color there would be helpful.
George Tuttle
Yes. So, we launched Wi-Fi in at market this year. It’s using the 11n standard which is really the simpler standard that drives long range. AC is really used for it’s only a 5 GHz standard shorter range but much higher data rates. So, those are used for like more streaming video and very high speed connections.
Our focus in IoT is on the end node. So, it’s the end devices many of which are cost and power constraint and our focus on IoT is to deliver very low power solution at a very cost effective point to be able to scale across this multitude of IoT in node applications.
So, we view that - the other thing to note about the Wi-Fi is that it’s a star network. So, it’s connecting a device to an access point, there is deployed access points and 11n is essentially the ubiquitous standard that can connect across everything. And ac access point and ax access point will be backward compatible to the 11n.
We think that the vast majority of the IoT and nodes are going to stay at 11n for the foreseeable future as the 11ax access points get rolled out, that that is something that is interesting on the road map. That will take some amount of time. The end nodes will have to support 11n and that provides really the most cost effective way to address the node application.

So, we’re looking at the ax applications and that technology but believe that we’re really sitting in the sweet spot of technology. In terms of the Wi-Fi is a higher power, it burns down the batteries a lot faster in a device. And so, there are many applications that require a ZigBee or a Z-Wave type of solution to be able to operate at the cost points and in particular the battery life that’s required for IoTs.
So, we see these as really compatible and complementary standards. Just like in a phone, you have Bluetooth to stream audio and you have Wi-Fi to connect to the internet. I think that there is going to be a proliferation of applications that require each of these standards and the fact that we can support all of those within a common platform is a big advantage to us in terms of being able to depending on the application use the appropriate wireless technology.
Raji Gill
Very good, Tyson. And a housekeeping question, John. You mentioned 8 million contribution from Z-Wave partial in June 2018 quarter and you have a full quarter in the guidance. What’s the kind of the full quarter revenue for Z-Wave in Q3 contribution?
George Tuttle
Yes, Raji. We had it broken down out. Last quarter we had a goal of 40 million, we did made cut in a little bit behind that but overall see the Z-Wave business on track and encourage what the progress we’re making with it.
John Hollister
Yes. That’s 40 million for the year.
Raji Gill
Got it.
John Hollister
So, we got 2/3rds of the year. We had about little bit less than 8 million in the second quarter and then we’ll have a full quarter here in Q3 and then another full quarter in Q4. And then total we had talked about last quarter was 40 million and we’re essentially on track for that.
Raji Gill
Yes, that’s perfect. Thank you.
Operator
[Operator Instructions] Your next question is from Suji Desilva from ROTH Capital. Go ahead please, your line is open.
Suji Desilva
Hi Tyson, hi John. Congratulations on the result. I just want to dig one more time into the timing of business and the non-optical improvement in datacentre. I don’t know if datacentre was driving the majority of the non-optical improvement. And that is what the lines be that’s driving the upgrade sweeping in your content. Is that a 100-gig plus gig bring in the 36-gigs or do you have any color, that will be helpful.
George Tuttle
Yes, it was actually if you look at the growth, it’s a mix of industrial datacentre and wireless applications. Really not a majority contribution from any of those. And I mean you’ve got the 56-gig 30s, there is a 100-gig, 400-gig role outs that are driving some of those within the datacentre and on the wireless side.
So, it’s a real mix that the customer base and the number of customers and the diversity that those business getting, is getting broader.
Suji Desilva
Okay, great. Good to hear. And then separately on the auto. I think it declined and maybe it’s pausing here. Are there any share shift in the auto broadcast or is that auto and demand driven and just curious hiring a new hire with that and it’s a and experience. Are you going to potentially be expanding your auto product portfolio beyond the broadcast?
George Tuttle
Yes. So, in auto, we just had a little bit of posits, there’s no share shift or anything like that. It was a little bit of just some movement of orders quarter-to-quarter in mostly in Europe that drove this slight shift on the automotive side.
In terms of other automotive business, we’ve got a fair amount of business within our isolation product line although the majority of the automotive business today is on the broadcast; the radio; the products that we are seeing contraction on hybrid and electric vehicles.
We also have a little bit of microcontroller business on the 8-bit side on the automotive. In terms of new hires, we’re certainly adding on the infrastructure side to our capabilities and isolation and timing and also certainly in IoT around software that’s been a big focus for us.

This year, as we brought a new FOX as well as the Z-Wave acquisition coming in. on the broadcast automotive side, I think we’ve got a pretty complete team. We’re focused on leadership on the software and winning market share there in the automotive radio space.
Suji Desilva
Okay, thanks guys.
George Tuttle
Thank you.
Operator
Your next question comes from the line of Tore Svanberg from Stifel. Go ahead please, your line is open.
Tore Svanberg
Yes, thank you. And congratulations on the strong results. First question, Tyson. Maybe you could talk a little bit about the IoT business and as it relates to customer going from a Gen 1 to a Gen 2 platform. Maybe you could talk a little bit about what happened there and I mean I’m sure the business is pretty sticky.
But when we start thinking about the platform approach and software and so on and so forth, how accrued it to the business what sort of a Gen 1 to Gen 2 platform really made?
George Tuttle
And so, the Gen 1 platform is essentially the set of products that we have out in the market today. And so, that is our complete multiband multiprotocol solution with integrated microcontrollers, integrated energy management, integrated wireless with the stacks and everything running in there.
Those have been very successful out in the market and we’re seeing broad adoption across the wide range of applications. And certainly as we move and that’s in a 90 nanometre technology as we move into a 40 nanometre technology for the 2nd Gen that drives really three different factors.
You’ve got there is certainly a cost that you benefit that you see by moving into a final line geometry. You also see significant improvements in power consumption that helps to enable a lot more of the IoT battery operated applications. And then you see an increase in functionality in particular around security but in terms of additional added functionality.
A lot of the cycles of learning that we’ve had in the first generation as we’ve engaged into the market or getting adopted and embedded into the Gen 2 with you know throughout this process we’re trying to leverage our both our design and especially our software investments to be able to seamlessly move customers as they go from a Gen 1 to a Gen 2 device.
And you know to continue to build on a lot of those customer relationships and as you know you see the roll outs of these technologies across industries. I think it’s just to continue on broadening differentiation that we’re able to deliver in a consistent way across all of these markets.
So, we’re really excited about the developments on Gen 2. That’s well under way. We’re also adding additional protocols that with the Wi-Fi coming in on the Gen 2 platform. So, that’s very exciting. So, we see that as a same expander but also deepening of the relationships with customers and a deepening of the differentiation that we’re able to deliver.
Tore Svanberg
That very helpful. And as my follow-up, if you look at the infrastructure business, you obviously start it with share gains and timing and then the last few years you’ve done a tremendous job in isolation. What are some of the other components or technologies that are obvious to Silicon Labs, either from an internal capital investment or even M&A?
John Hollister
Well, if we look at really the three pillars that we have at Silicon Labs, we’ve got IoT now over half of our revenue. We’ve got infrastructure both in timing and in power and the isolation as really deepening technologies that are very interesting for us in terms of sustainability long term and in the high quality nature of those markets.
And then, also the automotive application, a little bit more targeted but in the infotainment space where we’ve got a very competitive solution in a very large market to go after the electric vehicle area which touches on the power area. But some additional targeted applications within there.

So, those we believe that the SAM that we’re addressing today is substantial and growing now till 2022 about $12 billion and we got we’ve focused on converting the opportunity pipeline. We got about a $9 billion opportunity pipeline within that area and focused on converting those into design wins and driving growth and we believe that we’re well positioned to do that.
In terms of M&A investments, we really look at it through the lens of and needs to be strategically aligned with what we’re trying to accomplish. You saw that with the Z-Wave acquisition and the alignment with IoT. And I would say that we also consider opportunities within the power and in the timing space to be equally attractive.
So, those three areas are going to continue to be our focus both for organic investments as well as M&A. I would add that on top of that, the cultural compatibility, I mean we’ve developed a really strong culture here at Silicon Labs around design and around approaching the market and around product strategy as well as many different areas.
And that’s also an important factor as we consider these as well as the accretive nature of these to be able to add to the top line as well as the bottom-line. So, I think we’re really well positioned with the strategy. We’re really pleased with the progress that we’ve seen here over the last couple of years, really proud of the quarter that we’re just able to deliver and really excited about what we’ve got coming forward second half of the year and in 2017 -- 2019.
Tore Svanberg
Very helpful. Congrats again, thank you.
John Hollister
Thank you.
Operator
Now, I would like to now turn hand the call back over to Jalene Hoover.
Jalene Hoover
Thank you James and thank you all for joining us this morning. This concludes today’s call.JPMorgan Chase & Co. (NYSE:JPM) Q2 2018 Results Earnings Conference Call July 13, 2018  8:30 AM ET
Executives
Jamie Dimon - Chairman and CEO
Marianne Lake - CFO
Analysts
Ken Usdin - Jefferies
John McDonald - Bernstein
Jim Mitchell - Buckingham Research
Erika Najarian - Bank of America
Mike Mayo - Wells Fargo Securities
Glenn Schorr - Evercore ISI
Saul Martinez - UBS
Betsy Graseck - Morgan Stanley
Gerard Cassidy - RBC
Al Alevizakos - HSBC
Matt O'Connor - Deutsche Bank
Operator
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. Welcome to JPMorgan Chase’s Second Quarter 2018 Earnings Call. This call is being recorded. Your line will be muted for the duration of the call. We will now go live to the presentation. Please stand by.
At this time, I would like to turn the call over to JPMorgan Chase’s Chairman and CEO, Jamie Dimon; and Chief Financial Officer, Marianne Lake. Ms. Lake, please go ahead.
Marianne Lake
Thank you, operator. Good morning, everyone. I’m going to take you through the earnings presentation which is available on our website. Please refer to the disclaimer at the back of the presentation.
Starting on page one, the firm reported net income of $8.3 billion and EPS of $2.29 on revenue of $28.4 billion, all were record for the second quarter, even exceeding the benefit of tax reform.
Our return on tangible common equity was 17%. And also included in the results were two notable items, which I will call out in a momentum, excluding which EPS would have been about $0.10 higher.
The strength this quarter was broad-based across businesses and highlights include average core loan growth excluding CIB of 7% year-on-year, consumer deposit growth of 5% which we believe continues to outpace the industry; card sales up 11%; and client investment assets and merchant processing volumes, each up 12%.
We maintained our number one rank in Global IB fees and CIB delivered double-digit revenue growth across the board. Commercial bank revenue was up 11% year-on-year with IB revenues being a bright spot this quarter. And in asset and wealth management, AUM and client assets were both up 8%.
Turning to page two for more details about the second quarter. The firm delivered strong core positive operating leverage this quarter. Revenue of $28.4 billion was up $1.7 billion or 6 % year-over-year. Net interest income was up $1.1 billion or 9%, reflecting the impact of higher rates and loan growth, partially offset by lower market NII. Net interest revenue was up over $600 million, driven by strong performance in markets and IB fees and also higher auto lease income. NII this quarter was negatively impacted by a rewards liability adjustment in cards. And remember that last year included a significant legal benefit. Excluding these two items, NII would have been up $1.6 billion and total revenue up 10%.
Expense of $16 billion was up 8% year-on-year, with half of the increase directly related to incremental revenues, principally compensation in the CIB, transaction expenses and auto lease growth. About a third related to continued investments in technologies as well as headcount across the businesses and the remainder was largely a loss on the liquidation of a legacy legal entity as part of our simplifications efforts. And if you exclusive this item, expense was up only 7%. The legal entity loss, together with the rewards liability adjustment in cards are the two notable items I mentioned at the beginning for a total reduction of over $500 million pre-tax. Credit costs of $1.2 billion were flat year-on-year and credit trends remained favorable across both consumer and wholesale.
Shifting to balance sheet and capital on page three. We ended the second quarter with CET1 of 11.9%, up about 10 basis points versus the last quarter as most of the capital generated was returned to shareholders. Risk weighted assets were relatively flat, despite solid growth in loans and commitments, being offset across other categories. In the quarter, the firm distributed $6.6 billion of capital to shareholders and last month the fed informed that they did not object to our 2018 capital plan. We were pleased to announce gross repurchase capacity of nearly $21 billion over the next four quarters and the Board announced its intention to increase our common dividend to $0.80 per share affected in the third quarter.

Moving on to page four on consumer and community banking. CCB generated $3.4 billion of net income and an ROE of 26%. Core loans were up 7% year-on-year driven by home lending up 12%, business banking up 6%, card up 4%, and auto loans and leases also up 4%. Deposits grew 5%. And although growth is slower than a year ago, we are seeing record high retention rates and customer satisfaction scores.
Client investment assets were up 12% with more than half of the growth from net new money flows and we are capturing an outsized share as our customers shift from deposit to investments. Card sales volume was up 11%. And we announced several new cards as we continue to update our product offering. Revenue of $12.5 billion was up 10% year-on-year. Consumer and business banking revenue was up 17% on higher NII, driven by continued margin expansion as well as deposit growth.
Our lending revenue was down 6% on production margin compression and lower net servicing revenue, despite higher purchase volume in retail. And cards merchant services and auto revenue was up 6% driven by lower card acquisition costs, higher card NII on margin expansion as well as loan growth, as well as higher auto lease volumes. This was largely offset by lower net interchange, driven by a rewards liability adjustment of about $330 million, reflecting strong customer engagement across our Ultimate Rewards offering. As a result, the card revenue rate was 10.4% for the quarter, but our full year guidance of approximately 11.25% holds. Expense of $6.9 billion was up 6% year-on-year, driven by higher auto lease depreciation and investments in technology.
Finally, on credit. Charge-offs were down $36 million year-on-year, including a recovery of about $130 million from a loan sale in home lending. This was largely offset by higher net charge-offs in card. The card charge-off rate was 3.27%, reflecting seasonality and is in line with expectations and in line with our guidance. There were no reserve actions taken this quarter.
Turning to page five and the corporate and investment bank. CIB reported net income of $3.2 billion on revenue of $9.9 billion, up 11% and an ROE of 17%. In banking, we maintained our number one ranking for the quarter and year-to-date in Global IB fees and with a record first half performance, and we grew share across the regions.
IB revenue of $1.9 billion was up 13% year-on-year, outperforming the market but was down slightly as we saw robust activity, particularly in M&A and ECM. It was a record second quarter for advisory fees, which were up 24%, benefiting from a number of large deals closings this quarter. We gained share and ranked number two globally.
Equity underwriting fees were up 49%. We ranked number one globally as well as in North America and EMEA and gained share in a competitive environment, driven by IPOs and convertibles in the two most active sectors, healthcare and technology, which are areas of strength for us.
Additionally, we saw good momentum in private capital market as clients are exploring alternative sources of capital. And debt underwriting fees were relatively flat versus a very strong prior quarter, supported by healthy acquisition related activity. And we ranked number one in DCMs globally and across all the products. Looking forward, the overall pipeline remains strong.
Moving on to market. Total revenue was $5.4 billion, up 13% year-on-year or up 16% adjusting for the impact of tax reform and was driven by strong results in equities, solid performance across categories and with performance picking up in the second half of the quarter.
Fixed income markets revenue was up 12% adjusted on the back of good client flow and decent volatility and with commodities making a notable recovery from a challenging prior year. It was a record second quarter for equities with revenue up 24%, driven by strong client activity and favorable trading results, and with particular strength in cash, prime and flow derivatives.

Treasury services and securities services revenues were each up 12%, driven by higher rates and deposit balances, and security services also benefited from higher asset-based fees on new client activity and higher market levels.
Finally, expense of $5.4 billion was up 11%, driven by higher performance-related compensation, volume-related transaction costs and investments in technology. The comp-to-revenue ratios for the quarter were 27%, consistent with prior quarter.
Moving to commercial banking on page six. Another strong quarter for this business with net income of $1.1 billion and an ROE of 21%. Revenue was a record for second quarter, up 11% year-on-year driven by higher deposit NII and strong investment banking activity. Gross IB revenue of $739 million was up 39%, driven by several large transactions and strong underlying flow of business and the overall pipeline is robust and active. Expense of $844 million was up 7% as we continue to invest in the business, both in bankers and in technology.
Loan balances were up4% year-on-year and 2% sequentially. C&I loans were up 3% year-on-year and sequentially due to increased M&A related financing with strengths in our expansion markets as well as in specialized industries, and despite lower tax exempt activity. CRE loans were up 4% year-on-year and flat versus last year as there continues to be a lot of completion for high quality assets and we are selective given where we are in the cycle. Finally, credit performance remains strong with a net charge-off rate of 7 basis points.
Moving on to asset and wealth management on page seven. Asset and wealth management reported net income of $755 million with a pretax margin of 28% and an ROE of 33%. Revenue of $3.6 billion was up 4% year-over-year driven by higher management fees on growth in long-term products as well as strong banking results. Expense of $2.6 billion was up 6%, driven by continued investment in advisors and technology as well as higher external fees on revenue growth.
For the quarter, we saw net long-term inflows of $4 billion with positive flows across multi assets, equities and alternatives, partly offset by outflows in fixed income. Additionally, we saw net liquidity inflows of $17 billion. AUM of $2 trillion and overall client assets of $2.8 trillion were both up 8% with the increase being split about equally between flows and higher market levels globally.
Deposits were down 7% year-on-year, reflecting continued migration into investment where we are also capturing the vast majority and down 3% sequentially on seasonal tax payments. Finally, we had record loan balances, up 12% with strength in global wholesale and mortgage lending.
Moving to page eight and corporate. Corporate reported a net loss of $136 million. The result included a pretax $174 million loss on a liquidation of a legacy legal entity, previously mentioned. But it’s of note that while this loss through expense affects retained earnings this quarter, it is offset from a capital perspective. So, it’s capital neutral.
Before I wrap up, you may note, we have no outlook page here. Although both revenue and expense are trending higher market-related, given we’re only halfway through the year, we’re not updating our outlook at this point.
So, to close, the macroeconomic backdrop continues to be supportive. Consumer and business confidence and sentiment remain high, client activity levels are robust, and the markets are open and active. We are pleased with the firm’s results this quarter. Our broad-based financial performance clearly demonstrates the power of the platform. Revenue grew strongly, double digits year-over-year in many cases. We realized positive core operating leverage, despite significant investments and credit trends remain favorable across both consumer and wholesale. This was a clear record for second quarter, whichever way you slice it. We remain focused on consistently delivering for our customers and our communities and investing for the long term.

With that, operator, can you open up the line for Q&A?
Question-and-Answer Session
Operator
[Operator Instructions] Our first question comes from Ken Usdin of Jefferies.
Ken Usdin
Hey. Good morning, Marianne. Can I ask you to talk a little bit about the card business? And you mentioned the strong customer engagement with regards to the rewards markdown. Can you just walk us through what’s the drivers of that and this is a one-time event and does it affect the card revenue rate outlook?
Marianne Lake
So, I’ll start with the end because that’s pretty simple. It obviously affected the card revenue out in the quarter. You can see that that was 10.4%. And you can see on the page, we’ve adopted for the impact. But, the 11.25% for the year remains true, which is to say that while this may be slightly larger than normal, it’s not exactly one-time item. We regularly review our liability as we observe the mix of our portfolio and the behaviors of our customers.
On face value, I know rewards is often talked about as a competitive matter. I mean, this is less about competition per se. In fact, we have record low in sales attrition, which in a competitive environment is really very good. And it’s more about customers awareness of the value proposition of rewards and them being engaged in redeeming them, which for us is a positive thing because engaged customers spend more and we’re seeing that they attrite less, and we’re seeing that. And they will bring us more deposits and investments as we deeper relationships. So, I would say it’s a little larger than normal. We do it pretty regularly. So, it’s not one-time but it’s not completely typical.
Ken Usdin
Got it. And in the press release, Jamie mentioned the first paragraph about increasing competition. Is that a global across all businesses comment or are you seeing it now really in specific areas? Thanks.
Marianne Lake
Okay. I think it’s -- I mean it’s pretty global across all businesses, as a general matter, and there are some obvious areas where it’s pretty acute. And in the retail also space for example, we talked about commercial real estate for example, mortgage clearly with capacity and the systems for example, all of those areas are pretty competitive for a variety of reasons given where we are in the cycle in the economy and like. But I would say broad based, it’s everywhere. That said, we are holding our own and in many cases gaining share. So, we’re doing pretty well.
Operator
Our next question is from John McDonald with Bernstein.
John McDonald
Hi, Marianne. I wanted to ask you what you are seeing this quarter in terms of customer deposit trends, a little more color on both the pricing beta and volume balances. Kind of wondering, if you are seeing a lot of competition from the online competitors like Marcus and whether those are affecting your deposit balances with consumers being attracted towards high yields and affecting your pricing decisions?
Marianne Lake
Okay. So, I would say -- you talked to consumer deposits, so, I am talking retail now, not the sort of high net worth, but I’ll come back to that. Consumer deposit up 5% year-on-year, slowing down as we would have expected, while you have seen online competitors and even some regional competitors make some moves in the large bank space, we haven’t really seen that yet. When we look at the deposit slowdown and we unpack it, it feels to us like the vast majority of the root cause is customers moving into investments. And in the case of regional customers, that seem to manage accounts. So, it doesn’t even appear to be rate seeking. Spending more would be the second driver and to a much lesser extent are we seeing behaviors like the rate seeking at this point.
So, we’re not seeing that kind of migration out of the Company to online or other competitors at this point. And so, at this point, reprice is still not happening. That said, we are on a journey clearly. And in the higher net worth space, we continue to see the migration into investment assets we’ve been seeing. And again we continue to recapture the vast majority of those. So, at this point, things are playing out as we would have expected and we’re not actually losing deposits en masse to any third parties.

John McDonald
Okay. And just a follow-up on that. Can you remind us what’s the opportunity you see with the rollout of Finn and what advantages you expect to have in that arena?
Marianne Lake
So, I would look at Finn as one of many sort of digital innovations that we’re doing, and I would look at it also in conjunction with broader, digital account opening. And although we’ve now launched Finn nationwide, I think it’s fair to say it’s still very nascent and we’re still learning. So, we’re going to continue to advance -- and it’s got very high net promoter score by the way. So, customer experience is good. But it’s still quite young.
Jamie Dimon
We haven’t really marketed…
Marianne Lake
So, we’re just starting. I would say, digital account opening on the other hand is a pretty good success story. And we are seeing a lot more accounts opened digitally across the channels and we’re seeing of those, a decent chunk of net new to bank. And where we’re seeing existing customers open new accounts, we’re getting incremental money. So, we are seeing our digital asset pay off and even more broadly than that we could go into quick payments and the like. But, I wouldn’t focus overly on Finn as an eye focusing but think digital more broadly.
Operator
Our next question is from Jim Mitchell of Buckingham Research. 
Jim Mitchell
Hey, good morning. Maybe just talk a little bit about loan growth. Obviously, it seems to have picked up in the fed data over the last month or two. What are you guys seeing on the ground? And do you think it’s -- what we’ve seen so far is a good indicator for maybe a more sustained pickup in growth?
Marianne Lake
Yes. I would say that we would use the commercial bank C&I loans as kind of bellwether. There has been decent demand. And I mentioned it in my remarks, the decent demands, not exclusively but partly on the back of a very robust and active M&A environment. And so, the demand is there, I would say, growth is solid, and in line with our expectations we will continue to hope to see that growth as we go through the year. And there may be other tailwinds. We’ve yet to see the full effect of tax reform flow through in profitability and free cash flow. And so, I would characterize loan growth as solid and our expectations for the outlook to remain solid, benefitting from very active capital markets environment.
Jim Mitchell
Okay. And maybe as a follow-up, when we think about NIM going forward, I mean, I think it was a couple of years ago that you talked about maybe normalized being somewhat the 265 to 275 range or 246 now. Is there a certain loan to deposit ratio you think you need to have, or level of rate? How would you -- just trying to think through how we think about NIM going forward?
Marianne Lake
Yes. I mean we’re at -- fed funds of 125 to 200 right now, but we are not anywhere yet close to normal rates. And so, when we think about what you talk about normalizing NIM, we are thinking about it more through the cycle adjusting for new liquidity rules and everything else. So, we have a number of further rate hikes to go before we reach that point. But, we are on a core basis -- and remember, we have a fairly sizeable market balance sheet, but on a core basis we are continuing to see NIM expansion in line with expectations and moving up towards that. So, we would expect to see expansion year-over-year moving towards that level but not getting there yet.
Operator
Our next question is from Erika Najarian of Bank of America.
Erika Najarian
My question is on the regulatory process this year under the new leadership. I am wondering if there’s anything that you could share with us that you’ve observed in terms of change. Whether or not it was -- how receptive or not the regulators were during the comment period for the SEB and also during the CCAR process? Was there any marked or observable change in the processes this year versus previous years?

Marianne Lake
Yes. So, I would say on the commentary of the SEB, obviously during the comment period, the regulators are quiet. So, it wasn’t a two-way dialogue during that period. We would expect the two-way dialogue to start now that the comment period is over and the industry and bilateral letters have been submitted. I will say, going back to comments I think I’ve made previously that I remain constructive about the willingness for the current leadership to pay attention and take on those comments. And if you look at the proposal that was sent out for comments, not only did it have a large number of questions that they were asking the feedback on but their actual proposal was very similar to what we have been understanding was the intention in speeches that go back a fair way, which is to say that it feels like we’re still making the sausage rather than this is a done deal. And so we’re very optimistic that the comments will be taken on board. And they are -- volatility was evident in spades in this test, opaqueness, GSIB. We can go through them, I am sure we will. So, we remain optimistic that the comments -- bilateral discussions will start now. I would say -- the industry discussions will start now. I would say on CCAR, it felt close to prior years. It not to say that it is not constructive, it’s just -- it’s not like basically as prior years.
Erika Najarian
And just my follow-up question is, the pushback that I am getting from a lot of investors on bank stocks is that we are long in the tooth in the economic cycle. Clearly, there is strong activity levels that you posted this quarter and the credit metrics that you posted would suggest otherwise. And I am wondering, both Jamie and Marianne, how you would respond to that pushback that now it’s not the time to invest in banks because we are late in the game from an economic standpoint?
Marianne Lake
Yes. I mean, I would say two things, which is while this cycle is older than potentially typically cycles have been, growth over the last decade has been lower through the recovery. So, there is plenty potentially of room to play. And as we look at all the economic data, not just here in the U.S. but also globally, there are no real signs of fragility. And I know, people are staring at the flat yield curve and we would say that that flat yield curve is a bear flattening, good flattening compared to profitability perspective and not some looming risk of a recession embedded in it. So, I am saying it’s still negative. Real policy rate is still at zero, credit is very benign. That said, we are in cyclical businesses, no doubt. And so, we are preparing and we will be ready when the cycle turns and no doubt there will be impact from that. But through the cycle, I think we’ve proven our business model will produce strong shareholder returns and among best-in-class performance.
Operator
Our next question comes from Mike Mayo of Wells Fargo Securities.
Mike Mayo
I wanted to follow up on that last question, if Jamie could respond to. I mean, Marianne, you said the macro is very supportive, you sound very positive. On the other hand, the 10-year treasury yield has flashed some warning signs to a variety of parties. So, Jamie, we have the tax cut, we’ve been waiting for the extra boost to the economy, whether it’s capital expenditures or whatever. Do you think the economy is accelerating, it’s still on steady footing, it’s the same or maybe it’s slowing down? And how should we think about the 10-year? And how do you think about the 10-year, and how do you manage to a flatter yield curve?
Jamie Dimon
Yes. So, just real quickly, Mari said, it’s almost 9 or 10 years of growth at 2%, averaging 20% over the 10 years, it really should have been closer to 40%. There is a lot of evidence that the slack in the system is being finally -- people going back to workforce. The consumer balance sheet is in good space, capital expenditure is going up, household formation is going up, home building is in short supply, the banking system is very, very healthy compared to the past. Consumer confidence and business confidence are very high, albeit off their highs, probably because of some of our trade. So, if you’re looking for potholes out there, there are not a lot of things out there, and growth is accelerating. And of course, things are always a little bit different. My own personal view is that the 10-year is 10-year. I wouldn’t say it has to happen the way it’s happened every time last time. I just think that’s a mistake. The fed is reversing the balance sheet. I think it’s very easy that rates can go up, the 10-year rates can go up in a healthy environment. In history, we’ve had rates going up where you had a healthy environment. It’s not always true that the 10-year going up is bad.

Marianne Lake
Right. I would also say that the shape of the curve is correlated to fed funds in a tightening cycle and that is what we’re seeing. So, while there are other factors weighing potentially on the 10-year in terms of still very accommodative central bank policy, particularly in the banks of Japan and the ECB where obviously trade is not necessarily constructive just in terms of the narrative, short-term underfunded pensions going into bumps, there are some technicals. But fundamentally, what you are seeing in terms of the flattening is pretty typical of a tightening cycle. And as long as it’s accompanied with solid to strong economic growth, it doesn’t concern us at this point. And in fact, as we’ve been pointing out, we are still levered toward fund and rates from a profitability perspective, and we do expect the curve to steepen over time.
Operator
Our next question is from Glenn Schorr of Evercore ISI.
Glenn Schorr
Just one follow-up on the competition conversation. I just want to see, your loan growth decelerated but it was in line with your 7% to 8% goal. Your loan beta capture, what you’re getting on the pricing side is actually a little bit better than what you’ve given up on the deposit sign. So, that all seems fine, but this is the first time I remember putting in the comment about the competition. Are you still okay with the 7% to 8% goal? And maybe just an add-on to that, I’m just curious if part of the competition has anything to do with the private credit market that seems to be growing pretty strongly.
Marianne Lake
I would say just a tiny little correction. Our outlook was 6% to 7% core loan growth excluding the CIB. We’re at 7% now. Things are still moving ahead in line with that. I would also just point out that it is an outlook, not a target. So, while we still feel like that is our outlook at this point, we obviously are going to make the right decisions, based upon the environment that we’re in. Competitively the private credit market for commercial real estate, for leverage, lending, it’s competitive, but so are also the mainstream competitors. It’s just the environment is pretty constructive and everybody is trying to get access to the high-quality assets. So, margins are under pressure. And we will make sure we’re getting the right return for the risk we’re taking.
Glenn Schorr
Okay. And then, the follow-up on the expense side. If you did 16 times 4 would be 64. Your outlook is 62, but a lot of those were good expenses on better volumes. Are you still on track in your mind for the overhead ratio goals? I don’t want to overly focus on a dollar amount.
Marianne Lake
It’s a couple of things. So, 62, remember, the 62 was before the impact of expense gross up. So, the actual full-year outlook was about $63 billion, about $63 billion including them. This quarter included one-time item, $174 million on the legal entity liquidation. We knew about that, obviously. So, it was in our number, but you can’t annualize it, you can’t sort of times it by four. So, you’re absolutely right. As we look out for the full year, to the degree that we would be above our -- our outlook is $63 billion, it would be largely driven, if not exclusively driven, by higher performance-related compensation on higher revenues, with the only other caveat that as you probably know, we are waiting as I’m sure you are for when the FDIC surcharge is taken away. The FDIC anticipated that would be in the middle of the year this year, but that is now potentially at some risk, moving out into the third or fourth quarter. So, while that could have an impact on this year, to answer your broader question, are we still on track for our expense overhead ratios? Yes.
Operator
Our next question is from Saul Martinez of UBS.

Saul Martinez
So, just following on the theme of economics and policy, to what extent do you see trade friction, geopolitical concerns, those things starting to impact client sentiment, whether it’s institutional or corporate clients? And ultimately, do you see that -- or how do you gauge that as being a risk to global growth and U.S. growth?
Marianne Lake
Yes. So, I would say, so far, where we are is that trade is firmly part of the risk narrative. So, it’s definitely, as Jamie has said, on the psyche of people. But it’s not at this point causing them to change the strategic actions and decisions that they’re making, but clearly part of the conversation. And as currently outlined, it’s more of that than it is a real impact to sort of the global macroeconomic outlook. But that isn’t to say that uncertainty can’t ultimately lead to more challenges or slower growth but because confidence is a really important part of not just business investment cycle but also the financial market stability. So, at this point, it’s more of a risk narrative than it is an actual driver. But, it is important that that uncertainty is taken off the table.
Saul Martinez
Okay. And if I could just ask a quick follow-up, and I apologize if you addressed it earlier, a lot of multitasking this morning, but on the market side, you did much better than what Daniel suggested in his update in terms of year-on-year being flattish overall. Can you just give us a sense of what changed in the last month of the quarter?
Marianne Lake
Yes. I’m going to say yes. In a nutshell, it got better. But let me just give you the context. The context is as you’ll recall, as we ended the first quarter, there were some bouts of volatility and clients became more cautious. And that carried over into the first part of this quarter. And so, while activity was fine, it wasn’t as strong. In the second half of the quarter, that generally faded, activity levels picked up. And I would say there were more catalysts. And ironically, one of the more catalysts when you’re thinking about trading volatility or intraday volatility or vol of vol, trade is part of that; emerging market idiosyncratic events are part of that. The European sovereign Italy situation, so, there’s just more catalysts in the market and just generally, more client participation.
Operator
Our next question is…
Marianne Lake
Sorry. Just to finish that to make sure that no one is confused. It was pretty broad based. It was pretty consistent throughout the second half of the quarter. And it wasn’t a lot of one-off large trades.
Operator
And our next question comes is from Betsy Graseck of Morgan Stanley.
Betsy Graseck
Jamie, I wanted to ask about the China investment. I know that you put in the press release that you announced this quarter plans for a more significant investment in China. I just wanted to understand the timing. Is this something that’s over the next year or this is a longer-term three to five-year? And if you could give us a sense as to how much is in your control versus needing regulatory approval from folks over there et cetera?
Jamie Dimon
Right. So, I’ll just make a broader business comment for a second. We don’t run -- because I think we easily answered Mike Mayo’s question. We don’t run the business guessing about when there might be a recession because we know there’s going to be one. We already priced through recession. We like to blame clients, bankers, cards, accounts, products, services. That’s how we run the business. Some of the decisions you make are portfolio decisions. You can add to your mortgage portfolio or you can sell it. You can reduce your growth or the loans if you think the credit is bad. And of course, we will do that when the time comes, but we’ll still be adding accounts. And so, to me, I don’t worry as much about the 10-year bond or all these various things. We can manage those risks. We want more clients in almost every business we’re in and want to do a very good job for them in products or services.

China, it’s a long-term story. We’re not looking for any immediate thing. In the next 12 years or so, China will -- internal markets, maybe their bond markets, stock market is probably very close -- equal the size of the United States of America. Therefore, we want to be able to do everything we do here in China. We can do a lot of that in Hong Kong today, but we can’t do it in Shanghai. So, we’ve applied for licenses. And obviously, we need permission ultimately from our regulators and from their regulators. So, it’s totally in their control. And it may or may not be affected by trade, but I look at this as a point in time. It is what it is. Eventually, we’ll get these licenses. Eventually, hopefully, we’ll be a large competitor in Shanghai. Remember, we already do a lot of that business with Chinese companies around the world, with Chinese companies in Hong Kong. I mean, there are a lot of people going into China. So, we’re looking for the full set of licenses to do what we need to do for Chinese companies. Ultimately, I think it’ll be good for China to have a company like JP Morgan equity, debt, credit, transparency, governance issues, inside China.
Betsy Graseck
But right now, today, the ability to operate in Shanghai?
Jamie Dimon
No. Look, we already do deposits, we do certain banking. What we can’t do is equity, debt, and trading of equity and debt. Okay? So, if we get this license one day at 51%, we’ll be able to make -- and with these licenses, we’ll be able to basic equity underwriting, equity sales and trading, research, debt underwriting, debt sales and trading. We could do all of that today in Hong Kong. But remember, Chinese companies, they can do it in Shanghai, or they can do it in Hong Kong, or they can do it in London, or they can do it in New York. We just want the full capability.
Operator
Our next question is from Gerard Cassidy of RBC.
Gerard Cassidy
Marianne, can you share with us, and correct me if I’m wrong, I think you guys have given us some color in the past about the impact of the fed taking down their balance sheet over the next three to five years by a couple trillion dollars that it will impact your deposit side of the balance sheet. Can you give us an update of where that stands today?
Marianne Lake
So, the fed has been on a pretty well-telegraphed path here, reducing their balance sheet by about $50 billion a quarter. We talked about the fact that if you take $1.5 trillion out of the system, if you look at -- as the fed has grown its balance sheet, about half of that will ultimately impact deposits. And our share of it would be 10%. So, we talked about potentially that kind of $50 billion to $75 billion of deposit outflows over the several years it would take to reduce that. But primarily they would be -- not exclusively, but primarily not operating and therefore, limited impact on liquidity basis. And so, it’s playing out textbook right now.
Gerard Cassidy
Okay. And then, as a follow-up, I know you’ve touched on this increased competition. Can you give us maybe some more details in the commercial real estate and the residential mortgage area, what you’re actually seeing? Is it just pricing, or is it now loan covenants, is it loan-to-values, any further color there?
Marianne Lake
So, residential mortgage correspondence in particular is pricing; pricing, pricing, pricing. And so, we will see share if pricing goes to what we consider to be not sufficient to return shareholder value. In the commercial real estate space, I would say, it is primarily pricing. So, spreads are under a lot of pressure. And the competition, as I said, it’s GSEs, it’s insurance companies, it’s non-bank commercial institutions. It’s a little bit less credit terms but still pretty robust, albeit that we are seeing a tiny shift to the right in LTVs. We’re not going there, by the way, but I would call it pretty modest. So, I’d say generally terms are holding up quite well.

Jamie Dimon
On the competition issue. I think, it’s good for the country, United States that we have a fully competitive field in card, mortgage, retail, asset management, commercial banking, investment banking, sales and trading. There are strong competitors everywhere. It’s just recognizing that. That’s all it is. It’s a good thing. It’s called capitalism.
Operator
Our next question is from Al Alevizakos of HSBC.
Al Alevizakos
Thank you for taking my question. I’ve got one question and a follow-up. I do care about geographical speed of the IB performance. You mentioned that there were certain catalysts, and you also mentioned, both the Italian situation but also the niche market. So, I want to know whether the strength was driven by the U.S. or whether there were some specific kind of areas that were weaker or stronger. And then, my follow-up is that do you feel it is picking up… [technical difficulty]
Marianne Lake
I am sorry.
Jamie Dimon
It would be really helpful if you guys weren’t on your cellphones.
Marianne Lake
I am really, really sorry. But actually you were breaking up. And so, I didn’t catch most of that question. 
Jamie Dimon
Where is the IB doing well internationally, USA or Italy?
Marianne Lake
Okay. So, I would say across regions. Equities, strong performance across regions. While there were more catalysts this quarter, but you mentioned Italy, I think. None of those were particular drivers. So, we did fine on all of those, as well as I mentioned. So, I would say broad-based, gaining share we think in some areas in equity, cash and prime in particular, and holding our own elsewhere. And I would say solid performance across the FICC spectrum. And investment, yes, gaining share in investment banking. But obviously, you can’t look at any one quarter.
Al Alevizakos
Thanks for that. And the second part -- and sorry about that. You couldn’t listen before. Do you feel that you’ve started picking market share from the European competitors in the U.S., especially the ones that they are deleveraging?
Marianne Lake
I mean, I would say that if you just go back over the course of the last couple of years, you have seen some share shift from European banks to U.S. banks broadly. In the prime space, I would say U.S. prime incumbents are gaining some share, but it’s not a particularly new trend and it’s not the dominant trend.
Operator
Our next question is from Matt O’Connor of Deutsche Bank.
Matt O’Connor
To follow up on the net interest margin, you mentioned ex the markets business it was still increasing. And I was wondering if you could size the magnitude of the NIM increase linked quarter on a core basis, ex markets.
Marianne Lake
Yes. So, linked quarter, reported down 2 basis points because of lower markets NII and higher market assets, $20 billion; core up 8 basis points.
Matt O’Connor
Okay. That’s helpful. And then, just separately within CIB, the net charge-offs went up. Is that just some of the cleanup in energy? I know, you mentioned that there was a reserve release related to energy, but you had a little blip in the charge-offs there and I just wanted to get some color on that.
Marianne Lake
So, in CIB, the charge-offs were driven by two names and the principal one was the remaining piece of the Steinhoff loan we sold this quarter. We had a reserve release against it that was larger.
Operator
Our next question is from Gerard Cassidy of RBC.
Gerard Cassidy
Thank you. Just a follow-up, Marianne. On the capital return that you guys were approved for in terms of the share repurchase. Is that going to be spread out evenly over the next four quarters or will it be more frontend loaded?
Marianne Lake
So, we haven’t disclosed that. But, if you look at our historical pattern, it’s pretty even.
Operator
Our next question is from Betsy Graseck of Morgan Stanley.

Betsy Graseck
Just a question on CECL. I think, Jamie mentioned in the past that CECL is not a big deal for you guys, and maybe you could explain why and what kind of prep work and what you are thinking about as you work to adopt that over the next couple of years?
Marianne Lake
Sure. I mean, look, CECL is not a big deal insofar as we are getting ready for it. I will tell you that we haven’t disclosed an adjustment number on the basis that we’re still working through the modeling and the data. And it is more complicated, perhaps operationally to get everything lined up than you might think. We’re going to intend to be running some stuff in parallel next year. So, we’ll be able to give you much more color next year. Generally speaking, as we move to life of loan losses, it won’t shock you to know that we will have an adjustment to our reserves through equity. It will be driven most likely by any of the portfolios that have longer weighted average life versus incurred loss models, and card would be the most notable, to a lesser extent unfunded wholesale commitments. But, it’ll be manageable in the context of the firm, it goes through equity. And then, if you think about the economics the cash flows, the NPV of these loans doesn’t change…
Jamie Dimon
So, this is what my comment relates to.
Marianne Lake
Yes. It doesn’t change the economics of the loans. You upfront a little bit of reserves you get paid for over time. We don’t think it’s going to fundamentally shift the dynamics. But that will play out.
Jamie Dimon
You don’t make economic decisions based upon accounting.
Betsy Graseck
Are there any asset classes where it’s shorter under CECL than under the incurred loss model?
Marianne Lake
It’s hard because it’s life of loan. So, it’s hard to have a shorter -- it’s difficult to imagine that a life of loan could be shorter than an incurred loss. So, no, not really. But for us, the reason why it’s pretty limited -- not to say there’s no other impact, but the reason why it’ll be mostly driven by the areas I mentioned is because in most of our wholesale space and so many of our other products, we are covered for multiple years, if not close to life of loan at this point.
Operator
Our next question is from Erika Najarian of Bank of America.
Erika Najarian
A quick question, follow-up on card retention. You mentioned that rewards redemption is a sign of engagement. I’m wondering if you could share with us, once redemption hits a certain level in terms of the number of points, so, the number of points remaining may not be enough to redeem a trip or whatever. What is the retention level then?
Marianne Lake
I am not sure that I totally follow the question…
Jamie Dimon
They’re already -- they’re constantly creating rewards points and they’re constantly using those points. And when they use rewards points, some points cost us more than other points. And the pace of the use will change economics a little bit. But basically, it’s still kind of what we expect over time.
Marianne Lake
And remember that in a very, very oversimplified model of the universe, we would run an extraordinarily high level of redemption. We are giving these rewards to customers because we think that they are -- and they indeed are, perceiving great value in them. And so, we’re just continuing to observe that as the mix changes.
Operator
And we have no further questions at this time.
Marianne Lake
Thank you very much you guys. Bye, bye.
Jamie Dimon
Thanks for joining. We will talk real soon.
Operator
This concludes today’s conference call. You may now disconnect.State Street Corporation (NYSE:STT) Q2 2018 Earnings Conference Call July 20, 2018  8:00 AM ET
Executives
Ilene Fiszel Bieler - Global Head-Investor Relations
Jay Hooley - Chairman and Chief Executive Officer
Eric Aboaf - Chief Financial Officer
Ronald O'Hanley - President and Chief Operating Officer
Analysts
Glenn Schorr - Evercore
Ken Usdin - Jefferies
Alex Blostein - Goldman Sachs
Brennan Hawken - UBS
Mike Carrier - Bank of America
Brian Bedell - Deutsche Bank
Geoffrey Elliott - Autonomous Research.
Jim Mitchell - Buckingham Research
Betsey Graseck - Morgan Stanley
Vivek Juneja - JP Morgan
Brian Kleinhanzl - KBW
Gerard Cassidy - RBC Capital Markets
Jeff Harte - Sandler O'Neill
Operator
Good morning, and welcome to State Street Corporation's Second Quarter of 2018 Earnings Conference Call and Webcast. Today's discussion is being broadcast live on State Street's website at investors.statestreet.com.
This conference call is also being recorded for replay. State Street's conference call is copyrighted and all rights are reserved. This call may not be rerecorded or rebroadcast or distribution in whole or in part without the expressed written authorization from State Street Corporation. The only authorized broadcast of this call will be housed on the State Street website.
Now I'd like to introduce Ilene Fiszel Bieler, Global Head of Investor Relations at State Street.
Ilene Fiszel Bieler
Thank you, Lisa. Good morning and thank you all for joining us. On our call today are Chairman and CEO, Jay Hooley; and our CFO, Eric Aboaf, will speak first on our second quarter 2018 earnings highlights followed by this morning's announcement of our agreement to acquire Charles River Development. Presentations on each of these are available for download on the Investor Relations website, investors.statestreet.com. Afterwards, Ronald O'Hanley, President and COO will join Jay and Eric for Q&A.
Before we get started, I would like to remind you that today's presentation will include adjusted basis and other measures presented on a non-GAAP basis. Reconciliations of these non-GAAP measures to GAAP are available in the addendum included in the 2Q '18 financial materials released today.
In addition, today's presentation will contain forward-looking statements. Actual results may vary materially from those statements due to a variety of important factors such as those factors referenced in our discussion today. Our forward-looking statements speak only as of today, and we disclaim any obligations to update them even if our views change.
Now let me turn it over to Jay.
Jay Hooley
Thanks, Ilene, and good morning, everyone. As you've seen, we've announced our second quarter results as well as a definitive agreement to acquire Charles River Development, a premier front office investment management software solutions provider.
Our acquisition of Charles River represents a key milestone in our digital and technology transformation aimed at leading the evolution of the investment servicing industry. We're very pleased with this transaction and we'll take you through the details a little later on the call.
First, let me cover some of the highlights of the second quarter and then I will turn it over Eric to walk you through the 2Q '18 financials. We'll then discuss the announced acquisition in more detail.
Our second quarter and year-to-date 2018 results reflects strength across our asset servicing and asset management businesses as we continue to deepen client relationships, win new business and advance our digital transformation. Second quarter earnings also included substantial EPS growth and increased return on equity.
We continue to see strength across our core franchise. Equity market appreciation and new business lifted our assets under custody administration with growth of approximately 9% from second quarter 2017 to nearly $34 trillion. We saw year-to-date servicing commitments of approximately $1.5 trillion, of which approximately $105 billion were won in the second quarter with new business yet to be installed of approximately $300 billion as we installed the large Vanguard win and begin the BlackRock transition. And we are recognized as a number one FX provider to asset managers in the Real Money FX survey with the best overall customer satisfaction rate.

State Street Global Advisors finished second quarter 2018 with assets under management levels of $2.7 trillion, up approximately 5% from second quarter 2017, driven by strength in equity markets and ETF flows with continued traction in our low-cost ETF products launched late last year.
Furthermore, we continue to realize benefits from Beacon, our multi-year program to digitize our business and drive new solutions and innovations for our clients while creating greater efficiencies for State Street. We achieved a net benefit of approximately $60 million in both the first and second quarters of this year and now expect full year 2018 savings to be approximately $200 million, which exceeds our previously announced guidance of $150 million.
Additionally, our ability to deliver new tools and functionality is proving to be a meaningful factor in point of differentiation and client decisions as demonstrated by the Vanguard win.
Building on the success of Beacon, we are monetizing our digitization accomplishments and reducing manual processes. We are continuing to focus on achieving greater organizational effectiveness and streamlining as we move into the next phase of opportunities, which Eric will discuss further. 
To conclude, I'm very pleased with our financial performance to date. Revenue growth was strong, driven by both fee revenue and net interest income, reflecting the higher U.S. market interest rates, continued market appreciation, new business wins and higher trading activity. We remain focused on expense management, which you saw this quarter as we actively calibrated cost to revenues while prudently investing in new products and solutions.
We also declared a common stock dividend of $0.42 per share in the quarter. And yesterday we declared a 3Q '18 dividend of $0.47 per share, representing an increase of 12% from 2Q '18 dividend. Importantly, we continue to be well positioned to achieve our financial objectives in 2018, including delivering full year positive fee operating leverage.
And with that, over to you, Eric?
Eric Aboaf
Thank you, Jay, and good morning, everyone. Please turn to Slide 4 where I will begin my review of 2Q '18 and year-to-date results. We have highlighted a few notable items, which we believe provide investors insight into specific initiatives as well as our underlying business trends.
As you can see on the right, 2Q '18 results included net charge of $77 million or $0.17 per share consisting of $61 million of compensation expenses related to the organizational realignment and management delayering and $16 million of occupancy costs as we continue right size our real estate footprint. I'll also remind you that the quarters of 2018 reflect the impact of the new revenue recognition accounting standard. This has increased both total fee and total expense by $70 million year-over-year but as EBIT neutral.
Now let me move to Slide 5 where most of my comments will focus on year-over-year results. 2Q '18 EPS increased to $1.88, up 23% compared to 2Q '17. Excluding the $0.17 related to the repositioning charge, 2Q '18 EPS increased to $2.05. Both 2Q '18 and year-to-date results reflect continued strength across servicing fees, management fees and trading services as well as continued improvement in net interest income supported by the higher interest rate environment.
We continue to prudently manage expenses related to the revenue environment as demonstrated by an increase of 1 percentage point in 2Q '18 pretax margin. We achieved positive operating leverage of 1.4 percentage points compared to 2Q '17. Fee operating leverage was negative largely due to lower 2Q '18 securities and seasonality relative to 2Q '17, which were up 1.1 percentage points. Return on equity reached 14.7%, up 2.1 percentage points relative to 2Q '17.

Now let me turn to Slide 6 to review AUCA and AUM performance. 2Q '18 AUCA of $33.9 trillion increased 9% from 2Q '17. Growth was primarily driven by a combination of market appreciation, strong new business and client activity especially in EMEA and our middle office outsourcing business. AUCA increased 2% sequentially driven by the insulation of a significant portion of the bank Vanguard in the first quarter offset by the previously announced BlackRock transition, which is about 50% complete and lower market levels.
In our Asset Management business, AUM increased 4% from 2Q '17, driven by market appreciation and higher yielding ETF inflows partially offset by outflows from lower fee institutional index assets in a subdued market environment.
Please turn to Slide 7, where I will review 2Q '18 revenue. Total fee revenue increased 6% relative to 2Q '17 reflecting solid performance across most of our businesses. Let me take you through some of the details. Servicing fees increased 3%, reflecting higher global equity markets, increased client activity and new business, partially offset by continued modest hedge fund outflows. On a sequential basis, servicing fees decreased due impart the lower global equity markets as well as the transaction of the previously announced BlackRock assets.
Management fees increased 17%, benefiting from higher global equity markets as well as approximately $45 million related to the new revenue recognition standard. Management fees decreased on a sequential basis, reflecting lower global equity markets as well as net outflows in line with muted industry close this quarter. Trading services revenue increased 9%, primarily due to higher FX client volumes, driven by the depth of our FX capabilities and platforms, which continue to differentiate our offerings. Securities finance fees decreased, driven by lower seasonal activity into 2Q '18 relative to 2Q '17.
Moving the Slide 8, NII was up 15% on a GAAP basis and then increased 19 basis points on a fully tax-equivalent basis relative to 2Q '17. NII benefited from higher U.S. interest rates and discipline liability pricing, partially offset by a mix shift to HQLA assets. NIM increased due to higher NII and a smaller interest earnings asset basis we reposition the investment portfolio at the end of first quarter. Deposit betas for the U.S. interest-bearing accounts continue to move a bit higher but stayed in line with our expectation. We continue to expect good growth in NII.
Now let me turn to Slide 9 to review 2Q '18 expenses. Year-on-year expenses increased $21 million due to currency translation and $70 million related to the new accounting for revenue recognition. When considering these two effects, year-over-year expenses were well controlled, increasing just 2% from the year ago quarter as we actually manage the cost base and calibrated to revenues this quarter. Relative to 1Q '18 expenses decreased 4%, which included 1Q seasonally elevated compensation costs and the 2Q management delayering charge.
Excluding these 2 items underlying expenses were well controlled, decreasing 1% sequentially. A top priority continues to be the actively managed expenses relative to revenues. From a line item perspective, let me cover the year-over-year trends quickly. Compensation employee benefits decreased 1% relative to 2Q ‘17 due to continued Beacon savings and lower performance related incentive compensation, partially offset by costs to support new business. Transaction processing increased relative to 2Q '17 reflecting higher client volumes and market levels as well as the impact of the new revenue recognition standard.
Information systems increased relative to 2Q '17 as a result of higher Beacon related investments. Occupancy costs were up compared to 2Q '17, primarily driven by $16 million in the occupancy expense charge related to the continued rightsizing of our footprint, partially offset by a few discrete items that will not reoccur. Other expenses increased primarily due the new accounting for revenue recognition. Our intention is to keep second half expenses roughly in line with first half as of 1Q '18 seasonally deferred compensation bump.

Let me now move to Slide 10 to review our progress on State Street Beacon. On the left side of the slide, you can see that we achieved almost $16 million in net Beacon sales this quarter by optimizing our core servicing business, transforming our IT infrastructure and by gaining efficiencies within the corporate functions and SSGA. Notably, we now expect to realize approximately $200 million savings in 2018, which exceeds our previously announced guidance of $150 million.
Shifting to the right side of the slide, building on the success of Beacon, we are now transitioning to the next phase of efficiency initiatives that come as we begin to implement the organizational changes we announced in November, when we moved from a regional product structure to a single global highly functionalized business. We've thus recorded a $77 million repositioning charge related to management delayering as we implement this organizational change. We expect this repositioning charge to payback in about a year.
Moving to the next slide, let me touch on our balance sheet. Our capital ratios remain healthy and all ratios increased. Also, as you are aware, last month, our 2018 capital plan received a non-objection from the Fed as well as some taxable conditions. The non-objection was based on our CCAR submission including a strategic change that contemplated the acquisition of Charles River as a potential transaction and the related capital ratio.
Moving to the Slide 12, let me briefly summarize results. Both 2Q and year-to-date reflect continued business momentum resulting in year-to-date EPS growth of 30% and an increase in ROE of 2.5 points. Year-to-date total revenue increased 10% supporting over 3 percentage points of positive leverage as well as an increase in pretax margin of over 2 percentage points.
Before turning the call back to Jay, let me briefly touch on our current outlook, which excludes any contribution from today's announced acquisition of Charles River Development. We remain on track to deliver on our 2018 financial objectives, including fee revenue growth of 7% to 8%, fee operating leverage of 75 to 150 basis points, NII growth of 10% to 13% and a tax rate of 15% to 17%. It remains the top priority to actively manage the expense base relative to revenue. And you can expect us to continue to do so.
Now, let me turn the call back to Jay to start the discussion of our acquisition of Charles River, and then I'll be back to take you through the transaction details.
Jay Hooley
Thanks, Eric. And let me ask everyone to please turn to Slide 3 in the second section of today's presentation on our acquisition of Charles River Development. Today's announcement represents an important milestone in the digital and technological transformation aimed at providing clients with differentiated solutions. And importantly, this transaction will allow State Street to address a fragmented and underserved approximately $8 billion front office revenue pool opportunity.
Against the backdrop of significant industry change, institutional investors are relentlessly focusing on delivering better investment returns. At the same time, these investors face increasing complexity and regulatory expectations coupled with the needs to upgrade technology and manage costs while still focusing on product or geographic expansion. To address these challenges, they want solutions that add value across the front, middle and back-office.
We believe that the combination of State Street and Charles River will create an unparalleled platform for our client that uniquely positions us as the first ever global front, middle and back-office solution providers in the industry. Importantly, our platform will be interoperable, meaning that will connect and exchange data with other industry platforms and providers as well as the client's proprietary systems.

Charles River provides leading investment management software solutions to institutional asset managers, insurers, pension funds and wealth managers with a single investment platform for improved decision making, better risk management and greater efficiency while lowering costs. Building on our digital efforts, Charles River capabilities also include a comprehensive suite of advanced data management services.
In addition the strategic benefits I just mentioned and Charles River's leading position in the industry, we believe the transaction is financially compelling. We expect to recognize significant cost and revenue synergies that will drive attractive long-term financial returns for State Street shareholders.
In addition, the transaction generates an internal rate of return of approximately 14% with cost synergies only and greater than 28% with full costs in revenue synergies, excluding our cost of capital -- exceeding our cost of capital.
Moving to Slide 4. Let me spend some time further highlighting Charles River’s business model. As I mentioned, Charles River is a leading provider of investment management software solutions, and importantly, the acquisition provides a leading front office platform and builds on our digitization efforts. Charles River’s capabilities also include a comprehensive suite of advanced data management services. Charles River has more than 300 clients, many of whom are also State Street clients with an aggregate asset under management of over $25 trillion. Revenue was $311 million in 2017 and notably 85% of Charles River's revenue base is recurring, providing a stable revenue stream, which is not dependent on market levels.
On the bottom right of the slide, you can see Charles River’s broad client base and business segments. Charles River's reach by market segment in region is highly aligned with our target markets. We’ll also allowing opportunity to both expand share of wallet as well as the potential to add new clients. Notably, the acquisition will also enable us to meaningfully address the large adjacent revenue pool of the wealth advisor market.
Let me briefly highlight how the acquisition enables us to create an integrated front to back platform by combining State Street's data and analytics and those are Charles River and third party providers.
On Page 5, you can see what we mean by an integrated platform that optimizes the front, middle and back office. I’m often asked about our front, middle and back office capabilities. I think this slide helps bring those categories to life. On the left side of the slide you can see key activities within the front, middle and back office. Charles River's core front office capabilities for the investment management industry include portfolio modeling, construction and analysis, trade management and execution, order generation and pre-trade compliance aimed at an approximately $8 billion front office market. Charles River’s capabilities expanded to the middle office comprised of functions such as risk monitoring, client reporting, and post-trade support areas that complement our existing middle office offerings.
As you’re well aware, State Street’s front, middle and leading back office competencies begin with data and analysis. It include middle office functions such as investment accounting as well as core back office functions of custody fund administration and fund accounting. On the far right of the slide, you can see that the acquisition will create a powerful new combination. Charles River enables State Street to further expand meaningfully into the front office and ultimately deliver an integrated front to back office platform, a compelling proposition to help those client's rationalize front office systems, enhance investment and risk management, extract meaningful insights from data and access additional sources of liquidity.

With that, let me turn it over to Eric to further highlight why the acquisition is a compelling strategic opportunity. Eric?
Eric Aboaf
Thank you, Jay. Let me review the deal terms and go into some detail on the points that Jay just highlighted. As you can see on Slide 6, the purchase price is $2.6 billion. This will be financed by sustaining buybacks from 2Q to 4Q '18, which is worth $950 million and the balance will be financed with roughly two thirds common equity and a third preferred stock. We will look to offset the preferred by a similarly size redemption is more expenses preferred in late 2019. Lastly, we expect the transition to close by 4Q '18.
We are paying an attractive price for our premier front-office franchise. The PE with just cost synergies is 14 times and with full synergies is 10.5 times. The IRR in the transaction, which is a good benchmark on how we think about deploying capital, is about 14% with just cost synergies alone. This exceeds our cost of equity, which makes us confident an attractive use of capital. With full cost in revenue synergies the IRR is over 20%.
The financial metrics of this transaction are attractive because we're bringing together two leading companies with highly complementary product offerings focused on exactly the same top-tier client base. So first, we expect Charles River to help accelerate State Street's annual fee growth by 75 to 125 basis points as we deliver on revenue synergies worth $80 million of EBIT by 2021, which I will detail out in a moment. Notably, Charles River's significant recurring revenue streams adds to and diversifies our current servicing fee revenue. Second, we planned to create efficiencies that will ramp up overtime, which results in cost synergies of $60 million in 2021. EPS accretion is also expected within 2 years.
Moving to Slide 7, our combined client base will provide a natural opportunity to gain share of wallet among State Street and Charles River's existing clients, leveraging our platforms and delivering several additional services. To level set here at State Street we'll ready to serve about 75% or 155 of the top 220 institutional asset managers where we have senior relationships with CEOs, CIOs, COOs and business heads. Only half of the 155 are served by Charles River today as we detailed in the summary note at the bottom of the page.
So let me outline several areas of opportunity. First, we can help Charles River to grow their client base by leveraging our 155 top tier relationships, which could significantly increase their penetration of our top clients. Second, we have the ability to further expand the existing relationships with more than 70 shared top-tier clients, which provide us with a unique opportunity to rollout a true front, middle and back-office platforms. No other custody bank can do this. Third, with this combination, we have the opportunity to operate in State Street platform to mid-sized institutions that represent the additional 45% of global asset management outside the top 220 institutions.
Lastly, another exciting opportunity is to scale Charles River's established presence in the high-growth wealth management in private banking space. Here we can also leverage Charles River's Wealth Management solution to expand State Street's costing and accounting services into this attractive segment.
Turning to Slide 8, let me provide a bit more details on how we will execute on these opportunities and the expected revenue in cost synergies as a result of the enhanced platform. By 2021, we are targeting annual revenue synergies to deliver EBIT of $75 million to $85 million and annual cost synergies of $55 million to $65 million.
On the left side of the slide, you can see the components of the targeted revenue synergies. We have outlined these opportunities across five key categories each of which has a specific execution plan. $70 million to $75 million of the expected revenue synergies are driven by upgrading about 10 Charles River clients from client-sold software to the State Street Cloud and introducing Charles River to 10 to 15 State Street clients. We expect $55 million to $60 million of synergies to expanding our core, middle and back office services into Charles River’s existing base of top-tier and midsized clients. Approximately $70 million of revenue synergies are driven by expanding State Street data and analytic offerings. Gaining significant front office capabilities here supports our current front office data offerings allowing us to accelerate the growth of our global exchange business. This is particularly powerful for our joint clients. $35 million to $40 million will be achieved by integrating State Street’s premier trading platforms FX Connect, Currenex, Fund Connect into the part of our client investment workflows with Charles River’s platform, driving increased transaction volumes and trading fee revenues. And another $30 million to $35 million by penetrating the wealth management segment, which I just described. For each of these revenue opportunities, we conservatively assume product delivery cost base on fully loaded margins.

Moving to the right of the slide, there are three main drivers contributing to the target $55 million to $65 million of cost synergies. First, we expect to drive operational efficiencies by streamlining existing custody, accounting and middle office operations lowering unit costs by $35 million. Second, Charles River enables State Street's retire legacy systems to achieve an additional $10 million to $15 million savings.
And lastly, we expect $10 million to $15 million in expense savings related to the implementation of Charles River’s front office solutions within SSGA. This is a sort of benefit that many clients will see. And we've detailed this opportunity in the appendix. All of the savings can be realized from State Street’s existing cost base.
Turning to Slide 9. Let me wrap up by highlighting the strategic and financial points to support the value that Charles River provides the State Street's businesses and shareholders. Overall, this transaction represents a significant milestone in our technology transformation, which creates a first ever front, middle, back office solutions and generates attractive financial returns.
We are expanding into an $8 billion revenue pool, which is fragmented and underserved today. We expect to accelerate State Street's fee revenue growth as we round out asset management and asset services with a third nature of business. We expect EPS accretion within 2 years of the acquisition supported by various specific revenue and cost synergies. And while times accretion is a bit outside our traditional financial envelope, the intrinsic value and IRR are consulate above the cost of capital with cost synergies alone.
Let me now turn it back over to Jay and we’ll be happy to take your questions.
Jay Hooley
Thanks, Eric. And Lisa, we are now open for questions.
Question-and-Answer Session
Operator
[Operator Instructions]. Your first question comes from the line of Glenn Schorr with Evercore.
Glenn Schorr
So question on Charles River deals. With Eze Castle and Bloomberg being other big independent players, I’m curious on why timing is now for vertical integration or I don’t know vertical is the right word, but the integration of front-to-middle-to-back. And then I’m curious on how pricing will work? Will Charles River continue to charge explicitly or will this being woven into the overall State Street relationship pricing?
Jay Hooley
Yes, Glenn, this is Jay. Let me start that. I might ask Ron to comment as well. There is a clear trend, and it’s not a new trend in the world of front, middle, back to create more integration. You mentioned Eze and Bloomberg and BlackRock. We work with BlackRock on a similar solution where we were integrating front, middle and back office. Investment managers are under considerable pressure to get more efficient to gain greater access to data, to do more things for the single touch. So I think this front, middle, back integration is clearly the wave of the future. And up till now, it's been it's all fragmented with the custodians going into the middle office, but not all the way into the front office, you got some front office players working with middle and back-office players. So I think it's very clearly the direction of travel in this industry. And it will come together probably overtime even more so.
I think it's also true that we mentioned the word interoperability, which is we have a series of clients and now with Charles River we have a combined series of clients that we can better link together the three components of middle, front and back office. But we also will continue to work with Bloomberg and we've got a significant partnership with BlackRock and Aladdin, where we're the largest custodian in integrating the lab provider and service. So it's going to happen in different forms.

One last point I would mention is that one of the things that led us to Charles River was the State Street Global Advisors who a couple of years ago was looking to rationalize their front-office, which is something that most firms are in some form of doing. And landed on Charles River and that's what led us to Charles River. And SSGA will be one of the places where we'll integrate and where we'll control the front, middle and back-office to create a streamline interface, which will not only create efficiencies, free of data, but give us access to the front-office for the first time for some of our liquidity products and trading products. Now, would you add anything to that Ron?
Ronald O'Hanley
Sure, Glenn. This is Ron. What I would add to Jay's comments are that, in terms of your question on timing, it's a combination of pull from clients and where we are in our own digital and data journey. On that pull from clients, you need to be very well aware of this. Large asset managers and large asset owners that act like asset managers are operating with very complicated both technology and operations stacks. And there is a strong desire to simplify, a strong desire to get more straightforward processing and a strong desire to make better use of data in a timely way, which leads to the second point in timing.
As you know we've been on this road now for a while with Beacon and there's a lot of things that Beacon is driving. But one of the things that it's driving is our ability to take client data and present it back to the clients in a highly usable form whether to reinjected back into the investment process for analytics et cetera. So it's this data-enabled platform that will work with Charles River, but as importantly as Jay said we'll interoperate with other providers because what that means not all investment managers are going to want the same thing, but the one thing they do want is some kind of platform that enables them to work with their providers of choice and not have to deal with the number of reconciliations.
Jay Hooley
And Glenn, let me just pick up the second question which was about pricing. We will keep Charles River as a standalone entity their uptake. There's a convenience of their local. They're right at the street from us. And it will continue to be Charles River, a State Street company. And in fact, we will combine some of our existing capabilities largely in the GX world into Charles River to make sure that from a pricing standpoint that is for the state and set of capabilities, which will have distinctive pricing separate from our middle and back office capabilities.
Glenn Schorr
One last one, Eric. What cost of capital used in the IRR calculation?
Eric Aboaf
Just typical 10% to be conservative, so we think that’s appropriate for our business and then the other important part of the model of the IRR is always professional growth rate, which we tagged at 4%, which I think is overall on the low end of the range. But we thought, when we do these kinds of deals, we need to do it conservatively.
Operator
Your next question comes from the line of Ken Usdin with Jefferies.
Ken Usdin
Question for you just as around the capital side of things here, Eric. I was just wondering if you could walk us through. What happens to capital ratios on a pro forma basis at closing? And just wondering you’re moving off the buyback in the 950 for this year. Why the decision to issue rather than just not buyback going forward in terms of saving that extra capital? Thanks.
Eric Aboaf
Sure. The capital ratios are actually embedded in our CCAR submission. So you can actually take the controls as a pro forma. Obviously, I think we came in a little better in the second quarter than expected and that’ll flow through. When we, you can imagine this deal has been in process for a series of months and quarters that predated our CCAR submission. So as we were gearing up for the April, the early April submission of CCAR, this was a strong possibility but by no means assure. And so what we felt we should do Ken is to submitted as one of those strategic changes that is the specific form in the Fed filings for that. And effectively do it on auto call a capital ratio neutral basis. And so that’s why you see to spend buyback plus issues some amount of common equity plus top-up with preferred to get the $2.6 billion. On a Tier 1 ratio basis is the neutral -- on a leverage ratio basis it'll be neutral, on a set one ratio basis it'll be down by roughly about 50 basis points literally because of the preferred piece of the stack.

Ken Usdin 
And then just a choice between issuing versus just not buying back into next year CCAR, just -- how do you, what’s the economics of that decision?
Eric Aboaf
It’s not dramatically different. There’s a little bit of question, underwriter fees and discount when you go out to the market. On the other hand, we felt like it’s important to get on with this acquisition and to bring it together by the end of the year. And to be honest, we wanted to -- we’re also signaling that we’re confident in our earnings stream and our go forward earnings stream. And so while we temporarily suspend the buyback this past quarter and then two more quarters, we're fully committed to continue to return capital to shareholders on a go forward basis.
Ken Usdin 
Okay. And I’ll just one more on the capital front middle and I’ll stand aside. Just on coming back to CCAR this year and the counterparty number, which was candid like you guys have to go back and just look through that more. Can you tell us about the backend forth about that? What do you think was in the results? What do you have to do now? What is it mean if anything as you go forward? Thanks.
Eric Aboaf
Yeah, on the counterparty condition, I think the first observation which is make -- which I think the Fed made in its summary is they clearly felt comfortable enough with our capital planning processes, our management processes, our risk processes, our business processes to give us non-objection. So I think the kind of the strategic clarity is there. And in fact this was also embedded in this mission was an acquisition. And so they felt, I think, you have to ask them obviously, but it's our understanding is they signal with their actions which were quite positive.
They have asked us to do some more work on the counterparty loss paths. We've obviously been doing that since we've seen in January, so that's not new. We've started by adding more measurement and scenarios to our kind of pool of our arsenal of monitoring mechanisms we're sharing that with the Fed. And I think we'll refine the exact deliverables that we have over the next month or two and then execute on those in line with their expectations.
Operator
Your next question comes from the line of Alex Blostein with Goldman Sachs.
Alex Blostein
Hey good morning guys. A couple of more deal related questions. I guess the first one on Charles River, pretty robust operating income growth over the last couple of years. It looks like 11% CAGR. Can you guys talk a little bit about what do you contemplate for their growth to be on a standalone basis in your kind of accretion math through 2020? And then secondly, maybe sentimented on just the nature of the contracts they have with clients kind of like what's the average length? And is there anything of the contracts related to change of control that could lead them to negotiate, so just kind of thinking for any sort of revenue attrition you might have on the back of this.
Eric Aboaf
Yes, Alex, it's Eric. Let me start on this one. So as you've observed and we showed in the deck, we had nice top-line revenue growth, which obviously was a sweet part of our interest in them as a franchise. They are kind of leading an established franchise but they have nice growth dynamics. And that's largely because they operate in a fragmented space, right, a typical, call it $500 billion institutional asset manager may have 15 or 20 systems and subsystems and providers in everything from portfolio constructions, the compliance, the straight quarter optimization and routing to risk measurement. So it's a space that in our minds is open to strong growth by a leading player. And that's why we chose Charles River as we've been watching and scanning this space.
If you then take that and say, well, how do we think about the revenue growth synergies? Revenue synergies, we feel deliver about $80 million of EBIT over the first three years and that comes from about $270 million of top-line revenue. And then obviously we try to be conservative with the cost to serve. If you go to the buckets of revenue synergies on Page 8 that we've provided and kind of take through them, I guess, maybe the way I would answer your questions the first bucket and the last bucket are really the on Bluefin revenue synergies, so together about $100 million. And second, third and fourth of the middle buckets are really about the -- on State Street revenues. And so if you think about it that way what we’re effectively doing is taking Charles River, it’s got a revenue growth rate, at least based on the history, of about 7% a year. We’re effectively doubling that to about 14% based on the kind of on Bluefin or on Charles River assumptions.

Jay Hooley
Alex, the thing, this is Jay. A couple of things I’d add to that is, there were very few if any client termination clauses in the contracts. That’s the legal side of it. I’d say the non-legal side of it is, as you might expect, these are disruptive things if you wanted to change and unwind. So we think there’s more than ample of time not only with the introduction of State Street as a significant provider of resources to Charles River and with knowledge of most of these clients anyway to not only secure what we have but to expand upon it.
Alex Blostein
And then just another clean up question. When it comes to synergies, I think in the deck, you guys gave 2020 run rate numbers for revenues and costs came from a timing perspective. How quickly do you guys expect how to come in?
Eric Aboaf
Alex, it’s Eric. We didn't go into details of that because obviously it’s going to play out overtime. What I tell you is the synergies ramp up, it’s not completely linear and on the other hand it’s not a hockey stick either. Obviously the first year it takes a little time to get things going, in the second year we expect a real significant chunk of expenses. So that tends to lead a little bit relative to what I might describe is a linear trend line. Revenues will go the other way early year's bills then they build on subsequent years. So hopefully that’s enough just to help with the modeling.
Operator
Your next question comes to from the line of Brennan Hawken with UBS.
Brennan Hawken
Quick question here on -- as a follow-up Ken’s question on the common. Deal close is expected in 4Q, but do you have any timing for when you expect to issue this common and preferred and what you’d expect the cost of preferred would be?
Eric Aboaf
Brennan, it’s Eric. I think because we’re now in this open period here, I think the larger would resist if I ask them to name a day, a week, a month. So I think we’ll be on the market in Q4. It's an obviously, we’re watching markets to find a good opportunity. On the preferred, I think you could probably take some of the current yields and some of the new preferred issued by other similarly sized banks or you can look at some of ours that are out there and currently some of the required yields. We do think that the market is favorable relative to some of our historic; perhaps, we've got some that are callable now. We have some that become callable over the next year and obviously we’d be inclined to call the more expensive ones there.
Brennan Hawken
Okay. Thanks for that. And then thinking about one more here on the deal. The rise on revenue synergies is one that financial investors usually don't greet with open arms. So could you give us maybe a little bit more color on how you intend to insulate Charles River from maybe some of the pricing dynamics that we typically see in the trust bank world? How do you intend to allow for -- is the idea here that end-to-end will allow for greater insulation on the trust bank side? And how is it that you -- where do you expect the relationship to be owned if you're coming in front to back? Is now the ownership going to shift from the back office on the client side to the front office? Do you have any visibility on that? Thanks.
Jay Hooley
Let me start that one Brian, this is Jay. I would start with the point I made earlier which is while State Street is acquiring Charles River. Charles River as an entity will continue to exist as an independent entity with the connection with State Street. And in fact as I mentioned, we're going to push more of the product capability this front-office leading into Charles River. So the first thing is clear separation.
I think the Charles River has a series of relationships where State Street is not involved. And then State Street and Charles River have a number of -- a large number of clients where we jointly provide services. And I think we'll sought through to determine where the better relationship is. I would say generally, you'd lean more towards the front-office. And investment management firms, well, if those relationships are different the front-office tends to carry a little bit more weight. And one of the things that beyond the front, middle, back connection, which I think we all understand, I think one of the things that I think will provide upside to this deal overtime is gaining access to the front-office platform world. Some of the new innovations that we've created in our markets business around peer-to-peer lending, access to one button touch, access to specials and securities lending, to the extent that we can stream those all the way through on a highly automated basis. It's going to be differentiated. So I think the relationships will go through one-by-one determine where the lead is, but my leaning is towards the front-office from the standpoint of where the lead relationship would be. Ron or Eric, would you add anything to that?

Ronald O'Hanley
Well, the only thing I would add to that is that, I think it's important to remember the pricing was all about value delivered. And there is euro familiar as anybody with the challenges that investment managers are facing. And to the extent to which this platform is delivering value enabling them to not only cover costs but to streamline and improve their own investment process. We don't see this necessarily being subject to the same kind of commodities like pricing pressure that you see in other areas.
Brennan Hawken
Yes, I appreciate that Ron. It's just I wonder about once it's all under the same roof keeping it separated, but seems like you guys are going to try to keep separate at least initially. That's at least where it seems to me.
Ronald O'Hanley
Correct.
Brennan Hawken
Okay. Thanks. And then how about we take a refreshment twist to actually the results here this quarter? Deposit costs ticked up a bit. It looks like 13 basis points for the total deposit base. I believe it’s roughly two thirds for you guys, deposits that are in U.S. dollar. So is there any noise in that, Eric? And how much of that should we attribute to the U.S. dollar deposits? And am I right in the two thirds number?
Eric Aboaf
I think the -- just to go outright, I think, deposit rates came up as if they continue to raise rates. I think these are well within the bounds of our expectations. The U.S. interest bearing deposit data was just a snitch over 50%, which we think at this point in the rate cycle, was makes a good bit of sense. We need to share some of the benefits of the industry environment with our clients. We need to keep it, sells as well to continue to build our returns. I think we’re seeing good activity with clients on the balance sheet. And so, we’re very well engaged with them. And I guess the other metric to keep an eye on is the non-interest bearing deposits. And we continue to see the slow rotation, but that continues to move more slowly than our internal model. So I think all-in-all, a good quarter on interest-bearing deposits given we’re in the middle of the cycle. And as I said in my prepared remarks, we expect NII to continue to build from here.
Brennan Hawken
I’m sorry, Eric. Could you walk me to the math on that just over 50% because the 13-basis-point increase would -- I would assume applies just to the U.S. dollar deposit. So I would think that based upon that the math would drive that deposit ratio -- that deposit data higher for the U.S. deposit? Isn't that right or is there some other noise that’s in 13 bps?
Eric Aboaf
There’s more to that. So if you and others actually go through the average interest rate earning balance sheet in our financial supplemented Page 7 for those, but deep into this. I’d actually take a look at U.S. versus non-U.S. This is a domiciled view but it’s directionally right. So I focus on the U.S. rate, which went from 28 basis points to 37 basis points. If you actually have all the internal data, which effectively here the data on that was effectively 50% for U.S. interest bearing deposits. Just remember the non-U.S. domiciled line has the FX swap costs in there, right, because we’ve now -- in that line with footnoted at the bottom of page. And so you kind of have to -- if you want to start with that, you got to back those out and then split it U.S. non-U.S. But I just go to the U.S. line because it’s the simple and more direct approach and we’re off of that.
Operator
Your next question comes from the line of Mike Carrier with Bank of America.
Mike Carrier
Eric, just maybe one on the core business first. Just on the asset servicing fees, it seems like sequentially it became a little weaker, I know you had the international and their currencies weight on it. But just wanted to understand maybe for the quarter like the timing of both -- like the BlackRock and Vanguard assets, like how much was that in there and just trying to get you maybe more of a run rate. I know that’s tough with the markets in the FX, but just maybe anything that kind of weight on that besides the beta?

Eric Aboaf
Sure. It’s -- let me just kind of give it to you sort of broadly and then try to be as specific as possible that provides so that we’ve historically felt. So I'm not appropriate to go client-by-client, win-by-win, transition-by-transition, but let me see if I can be helpful here. I think I was trying to be clear that the quarter-on-quarter change in servicing fee revenue, which is down about $20 million, was a mix of market effects and this transition of BlackRock, which we had announced, I think over a year ago. And there is always a mix of other factors, right. There is kind of underlying product mix, there is client flows, there is a better shift between the U.S. and EM and vice versa, and there is always a set of new business and business flowing through. I think just for this time and I'll probably not be terribly attempted to do this every quarter, but the effect of the BlackRock transition for this quarter was about half of the $20 million and I think that can kind of be at the least the starting point if you think about the results. 
Mike Carrier
Okay. That's helpful. And then just one more on the Charles River acquisition. So on the revenue, on synergies, like strategically or conceptually that can make sense. Just wondering like when you come up with those revenue opportunities, how much of those revenues are like new for the client, meaning new services versus how much are they currently using another provider? And when you make that assumption at the potentially shift into the Phase 3. What is that like maybe the pricing assumption? You mean you have to be more competitive to kind of allure them away from another provider. And then I don't think and this will be a huge issue just given like Charles River's client base, but from a concentration issue, when you're doing the back-to-middle-front-office, do you run into any of those issues similar to, I mean it's very different, but just similar to like the BlackRock, your move in terms of some of these assets?
Jay Hooley
Hey, Mike, this is Jay. I'll start and then I'll hand it over to Eric. Your first question which is, are these new services that they're not currently employing today? I would say largely they're not. They're using either someone else's platform or someone else's custodian or the trading with some other counterparties. So most of the synergies on the State Street side, which are almost two thirds of the revenue synergies, are areas where they've got a counterparty today who have some sense of changing out of middle-office or back-office provider of State Street becomes like a custodian or State Street has part of the custody work. And we can show a more integrated value proposition as we've seen with some consolidation that's likely that we'll see more of that. I think to the extent that we can stream trading and lending and other credit activity from the front all the way through the back, which doesn’t exists today, but will exist once we get in and wire that together. They're trading with other counterparties they'll be compelled I think to trade more with State Street given the simplicity of execution and lowering of risks.
So I think a lot of this one is being done today somewhere else. And the transition and the lift it would cause one to make a change depends on the different services but it's not extraordinary in any of those different areas.
Eric Aboaf
And let me just add, it's Eric. I think if you go through the synergies, I think we tried to put some real detail on Page 8a. I think there is really a nice mix of different tax fix here. And that's why I like as a CFO, because then we’ll be able to execute and measure progress on every one of them. So take the first one, scaling the Charles River front-office solutions. Some of that is taking their existing clients and moving them into our cloud and that’s software as a service. And so, that’s just -- there’s an old way to do it in a new way. And we’re going to be able to accelerate that because we give Charles River kind of an institutional credibility, right that they may not have had, right, when you’re out there offering software to large asset managers. Those large asset managers want another, you’ll be here for decades and decades and they’ll get the next releases and so forth. So that’s part of the way this works. And then there’s a series of these where they have other providers, they tend to be smaller. I mentioned for the typical $500 billion asset manager is still often 20 providers, but there’s a range, it could be 25 or 30. And it tends not to be a price sell because this is a software service, there’s implementation, there’s functionality. And if you think about the CIOs and front office portfolio managers, their expectations are quite high. And I think this relative to some of the other services in the market. This is kind of front office capability, functionalities, the narrowing performance attribution where folks want the functionality, and I think, are willing to pay a fair price. And so, I think this is one where we’ve taken those kinds of risks into account in the synergy models but are quite comfortable.

The one other thing that I’ve mentioned because we haven’t talked about it that much is that we have put a global franchise here and Charles River has a nice U.S. franchise, I think, it developing European and Asia franchise. And if you think again, the institutional brand and reputational backing that we can bring to them as we help scale that international expansion is another part. I’ve not kind of overlaid that, but there is an overlay behind it in the execution plans against these synergies that really have a progression that as I’ve built out in Europe and Asia.
Operator
Your next question comes from the line of Brian Bedell with Deutsche Bank.
Brian Bedell
Maybe just to start off with the Charles River, so just looking at that in the front-office pool that you’ve identified about $8 billion and Charles River share that looks like around with the $311 million, just under 4%. And then looking at the revenue synergies that you’ve outlined some of that obviously is State Street revenue. But you still only imply maybe a 5% to 6% market share of that $8 billion pool. So can you talk about, you mentioned obviously and we all know this industry is incredibly fragmented and has historically been driven by sort of traders' decisions in usage of the products. Can you talk about the potential of actually increasing that market share and much more significantly? If you really believe that’s a decision making move to the corporate office of the asset managers where we'll be looking to really synergize this suppose to sort of on the trading course?
Ron O'Hanley
Brian, this is Ron. We're -- we want us to be conservative here in terms of how we think about the acquisition and not overstretched. But I think that you actually implied in your question is the answer. There is -- we see this everyday with our clients. There is a real desire to simplify to take the complexity out of the fact even amongst the largest asset managers who by any definition are exceeding what they're thinking about is how do we position ourselves for scale. So I think you're right that overtime particularly assuming that we deliver on this vision of a data-enabled platform that's interoperable with our technology and other technologies that the client might choose to use. We think there is a lot of upside here.
I'd also agree with your point that the decisions -- these front-office decisions are moving in many respects at least they're centralizing to the CIO as oppose the individual portfolio manager decisions. And in many cases that's a CEO, CIO and Chief Operations Officer kind of decision that again is around the idea of simplification and long term scalability.
Brian Bedell
And the regulatory approvals, who else is -- which do you need -- which regulators need approvals some of this.
Eric Aboaf
Brian, it's Eric, just a customary approvals from the Fed. And now there is obviously we've been approved this and include as I mentioned in CCAR and received the non-objection. So that -- I think that's informative. Obviously, we keep the Fed and all of our regulators up to speed any particular activity. This is clearly one that we've been discussing with them since at least since the early part of this year if not before that. And we've gone through a definitive agreement. We feel confident that of the value here. We feel confident that we can close in the fourth quarter.
Brian Bedell
Okay. And then just to go back on the asset servicing. Thanks for the color on the BlackRock transition. Is it, if I heard you correctly, did you say the BlackRock transition was from an asset perspective halfway done? And then if they also read correctly, I think, you've only got $300 billion left to install of the $1.5 trillion to the $1.2 trillion of the new deals over the last 2 quarters is installed? And is that going to be fully in the run rate for 3Q versus …

Eric Aboaf
Yes. You've got that right. You got that right.
Brian Bedell
And since you have a tailwind in 3Q from installations other than you have another half of BlackRock to canal?
Eric Aboaf
Yes. And this is where if you remember on our last call. There was a lot of questions and interrogations on who is the client will be now I would have tell you that it's Vanguard. We are quite proud of that win. I think it's quite clear in that call that there is always a range of different services that we offer, right, and both in different regions in the U.S. And so the basis point range on pricing if its custody only versus full vertical stake is quite different. And so I think I did that purposely right to give you a sense that in many cases. And I'm not going to comment on a second client now, but in many cases we start with the custody only offering, because sometimes that's the easiest one in which to start with. And then we -- for many clients, we scale that into accounting or administration or middle office or performance and analytics. And so obviously those are discussions we have on with all clients. We won’t comment on Vanguard in particular. But we’re excited to have them. We think they really were impressed with the automation and technology and so forth, but kind of functionality we’ve brought to the custody over the last few years for Beacon efforts and they have they're on a real growth trajectory, which is also constructive.
Operator
Your next question comes from the line of Geoffrey Elliott with Autonomous Research.
Geoffrey Elliott
Can you give us some thinking on how you look at M&A as part of your strategy more broadly? I guess the regulatory environments moved on a bit over the last few years, which may be makes it a little bit easier than it would have been a few years ago and GE asset management, which was quite smaller now. But I was kind of curious to see how it fits into the strategy and if this could be in the several transactions we might see over the next few years?
Jay Hooley
Jeffrey, this is Jay. Let me start that one and maybe invite Ron to jump in as well. We’ve -- I think we’ve said over the last couple periods that the two areas where we thought, we might be all that advance our strategy through an acquisition was both in asset management where we thought there were some select capabilities if we could acquire would enhance our solutions capabilities. And we specifically characterize those as smallish. That’s still an area where if the right thing came along that might be interesting. And the second area with this area that is really represented by Charles River, which is catapulting into the front office, which we’ve all, we’ve had a desire to do because we think that’s where this business is going. And we made a big move into the front office. And so I wouldn’t see other than maybe some small stuff or I’ll turn it over to Ron because, what even with the rumors of State Street and Charles River coming together, you have a lot of other front office providers that are looking to engage with an interface with us. Not necessarily that we would need to acquire but we would integrate to create more functionality in the front office. So I wouldn’t see anything more big on the front office, maybe some smaller capabilities and probably more likely partnerships.
Ron O'Hanley
Yes, Geoffrey. What I would add to Jay’s comments is that from where we sit now, we don’t need to do any M&A. And as we’ve, I think, consistently said we’ve got a business strategy, real growth focus in both the data analytics part of asset servicing as well as an asset management. And I think what you’re seeing here is relatively focused -- in both cases relatively focused acquisitions to basically accelerate a strategy that we’d already talked about. Jay’s last comment there about the platform that we’re creating is very important, because -- and I said it a couple times on this call. Our overall strategy even before we started talking to Charles River, has been about data and about this idea that information and information delivered in an inappropriate way and in an unusual way is the most powerful tool we can provide to the market. And as we build out this platform, which Charles River as a part where it goes way beyond Charles River, firstly, it's enabling clients, enabling us to bring lots of solutions to clients including their own solutions or including the solutions of third parties. And as we rollout more of this platform in perfective, it will be very easy for us to have a conversation with the provider like interest in us. And we don't need to buy it. They can come on the platform, we have to look at the pricing of all that. But it's a platform itself that provides the ability to bring all these things together rather than us having to acquire things to bring it together.

Geoffrey Elliott
Thank you. And then maybe just to follow up. You mentioned Charles River is going to stay as a separate entity. Who is going to be running that business?
Eric Aboaf
Yes, we will install a Chief Executive into that business somebody who is deeply experienced and running the software companies, the founder, will stay on in a consulting role to help us do the transition given he's got a keen interest in making sure this is successful.
Geoffrey Elliott
And you mentioned making keen interest on the part of I guess the fellows are making sure it successful. Is there any kind of announce or anything like that? Could it -- it kind of looks like a cash deal? And I guess what is that kind of tied to each of the fellows to the success of this given they're not getting State Street stocks are not going to participate in the hopeful upside of the shift.
Eric Aboaf
Let me separate the founder, who has an interest because he's built this company over 30 years. He feels good about State Street and feels good about State Streets being able to take this to the next level and he's obviously got an interest in that? It's not a financial interest, an emotional interest in it. But as you expect, we have spent a fair amount of time with the team and have put in the appropriate retention schemes to make sure that the core asset that we're buying, which is really intellects embedded and the engineers and the software designers are -- we think they're going to embrace State Street as a theme because we're going to invest in this business. This is about taking it to the next level. Ron, would you add to that?
Ron O'Hanley
Yes, what I would have add to that is that the founders here own virtually all the equity. There is very little that he doesn't own. So the ongoing retention here and the work with the team that Jay just described is there is a group of very high performing people are excited about them, they're great engineers. We have worked out a compensation plan that we think will be very attractive to them. And they like everybody else at State Street will share in their success.
Eric Aboaf
I think that probably that just one more point, Jeffrey. I mean this is a growth opportunity. I think you see it, hopefully you see it, they'll see it. I think growth in itself is exciting theme for the team at Charles River.
Operator
Your next question comes from the line of Jim Mitchell with Buckingham Research.
Jim Mitchell
Hey, good morning. Maybe to talk a little bit about 2019 impact, so maybe before we contemplate synergies if I kind of think about the before gone buyback the issuance, I guess the implied net income you expect for 2018 assume some growth. I guess putting that all together again about 3% EPS or earnings dilution. Is that a fair way to think about the numbers? Or is there anything and obviously building in the amortization in that number? Is that the right way to think about it? And if so, are you expecting to get any synergies in 18 to add to that?
Eric Aboaf
Tim, it’s Eric. I think it’s early days on this question. And you’re -- you've just started the modeling, I think, in probably in 2, 3 hours. And you're asking this question. I think you’re approaching it correctly, right. You’re kind of going out. What’s the earnings stream you're going to take the 2017 operating earnings? You got to adjust for some of the 606 adoptions, so you got to get that into the mix, you got to adjust for taxes and then you’ve got to build a growth rate on that. So and I think you, as I covered on one of the earlier questions, there’s some revenues that starts to come in but it tends to ramp up overtime expenses some in year one, I think real nice amount in year 2. So I think you’ve got the pieces right. I think what I would prefer to do just to try to be more helpful is when we get to our October call for third quarter, we can give you a good indication of select quarter EPS or I guess, or kind of earnings contribution from this because by then we’ll have completed the deal. We’ll know the exact timing. We’ll have concluded on all the financials. And then I think we’ll have in a good basis either a back call or the January call. It's something that's give you some ranges for '19. So I think, I’d rather take it in steps, but I think you’ve got some of the components, right. And we’re certainly happy to iterate with you on that basis.

Jim Mitchell
And then I think about compensation expense getting to the quarter was down quite a bit ex the charge. Is that a good run rate or was there some true up there for you mentioned incentive comp that we shouldn’t annualize that kind of number that we had saw this quarter?
Eric Aboaf
Yes. It’s a clear 2 part answer to that. I think on compensation expenses specifically, we did it just downward a bit for performance related incentives. We feel like we need to deliver on the financial commitments we have. We're I think ahead on Beacon and ahead on NII. And I think we’re conscious of the revenue environment and see operating leverage was neutral in the first quarter bit negative in this quarter. And so we obviously match incentive with results. We think that’s the way to run a company. And so there is a bit of an effect there. I think the best way to give you some indication of expenses is given we’re here in the middle of the year. This is the natural time for us to think about second half expenses versus first half. I think you could take a look at what we reported in our view is. We -- and I think, I said it, we intend to keep second half expenses at about the level first half. You got to just out that that first quarter bump that you get. But that to us is the right level of expenses, but we got to be careful. We don’t know markets are going to go up or down. We don't know what kind of macroeconomic environment that we're likely to operate in. And so we think it's best to be prudent on expenses.
Jim Mitchell
Okay. But should we exclude the $77 million in that comparison as well?
Eric Aboaf
For the repositioning charge?
Jim Mitchell
Right. 
Eric Aboaf
Yes. We think about that as a specific item. That address some delayering that we feel was -- is important and real valuable to do as we transition into a more global and functionalized operating model, yes.
Jim Mitchell
Okay. So you adjust that out. Okay, thank you very much.
Operator
Your next question comes from the line of Betsey Graseck with Morgan Stanley. Ms. Graseck, your line is open. 
Betsey Graseck
Yes, thanks. Two questions. One question I'm getting from folks this morning is the build worse by. And I know you decided on buy, but maybe you can give us a sense as to why that made sense versus building something else like this on your own?
Ron O'Hanley
Betsey, it's Ron. I would say that we're doing both. We've built out a fair amount over the last several years, built out or brought out actually if I think about it. Lots of what we've done in Data GX. Lots of the markets platform that we built FX Connect, Fund Connect, Currenex which will all be integrated in this platform I've described. It really came down to a decision that we see so much activity here so much pull clients. And as we got to know Charles River through the work that SSGA was doing was that we felt that this would really accelerate us to market and enable us to occupy just more of the space quicker than we couldn't on our own. So it was the classic build versus buying. It was really about timing.
Eric Aboaf
And Betsey, part of the answer is the capabilities the software and the products and services, but the other part is excess to 300 clients that are kind of in our sweet spot from a standpoint of asset managers, asset owners. In an addition we pick up access to this wealth advisor segment, which is a new segment for us and it's kind of exciting.
Betsey Graseck
Okay. Got it. And then the follow-up question was just on the synergies on Page 8, a couple of them are related to streamlining and cash at synergies out of State Street's middle and back office. So maybe you could help me understand how that works because you're buying someone who is more of a front office operator. So just want to understand that.

Eric Aboaf
Yeah, Betsey, it's Eric. Let me describe those on Page 8 on the right side there is a series of different synergies. I think at the bottom of the page, right, one of them is just implementing Charles River within SSGA our own asset management is factored in something that we've been considering for over 2 years now. So if you could imagine we actually did product and functionality diligence right with our CIO and PM teams long before we even consider this as an acquisition. So and if you think about SSGA we got $1.3 billion expense base in SSGA. If you look at just technology narrowly defined, it's $100 million. And so we're looking at some consolidation benefits from simplifying that what we have built, which is decent overtime, but not at the level of what we have here, so that's kind of one example. I think when you get to the operational efficiencies at the top, remember, and the systems, remember, we have a set of middle office systems today because we are in the middle office business, and so does Charles River. If you remember the slides that Jay showed earlier on, we’re both in that middle office area. For example, we both have a compliance system that helps with compliance processing. For the -- for asset managers, they have one we have one, a natural ones retired turns out that’s an expensive system to run and to operate. And so just something like that is worth in the $15 million range. So it’s those kinds of overlaps that exist. And then the last is, obviously, as we work on this middle office area, which is full of reconciliations and data flows in comparison as soon as we begin to offer a service that streamline some of that, there’s real costs to take out. And so we’re quite confident on the expense synergies there off of a relatively large base of what we do. And this is -- and it’s also an area we have a lot of experience extracting efficiencies off of.
Betsey Graseck
Okay. And the data analytics piece, I know you have been building out your data analyst front end platform. I think you showcase some of that several years back at an Investor Day here in New York. So just wanted to understand if the acquisition means that those efforts then go away or just get layered on to CRD because you don’t need to do that anymore? Is it -- in other words is it, is the acquisition a replacement of your internal efforts for building up data analytics platform or is it adjacent to?
Ron O'Hanley
Betsy, this is Ron, I’ll take that. I think it’s a little bit of both in the sense that there’s some capabilities that Charles River brings that are additive. There are some capabilities that didn’t have that with some what we have -- it just rounds out the sweet. And then there are some things that are by the dense back to work together. We can actually build something together that we probably couldn’t build, either one of us could have built on our own. So if you think about going back to Eric’s point on where the front office leads, and so the middle office would be a post trade workflow management. That’s probably a space where Charles River has some tools in it, but now that they’re exposed to our very large middle office business. We can build up even a better tool than they have had or include that matter than anybody else has.
Operator
Your next question comes from the line of Vivek Juneja with JP Morgan.
Vivek Juneja
A couple of questions for you folks. How is Data GX service price buying folks today when you pitch it to your clients?
Jay Hooley
I would say it's -- Vivek, this is Jay. Subscription base as a recurring fee associated with add-ons, if you add custodians or expand the base, and then in addition, once you get Data GX, which is the data aggregation layer. And then on top of that, we have a number of analytic platforms that actually apply some analytics to the aggregated data and that has a separate revenue stream, which is all subscription based. All of this is recurring based on usage.

Vivek Juneja
So not tied to the rest of the middle back office contracts that you may have?
Jay Hooley
Not at all.
Vivek Juneja
Okay. Ron, a question for you. I just heard you saying or maybe it was Eric, that for SSGA, your tech spending was $100 million and you're going to say $10 million hereby using CRD. So does this -- are you saying that this would cut front office costs for your clients by about 10%? Is that the right extrapolation?
Eric Aboaf
Vivek, it's Eric. I think every client will be different. We've been able to kind of interrogate our own base of expenses. You actually have to when you do the math even on SSGA of $1.3 billion our expense base. There is technology base for $100 million. There is also an operations expense base that's associated with that. And I was trying to just focus on the system just to kind of compartmentalize this and give us an estimate. But I think this could be representative of the value. And obviously, we think a value that way. We think that CEOs and CIOs are going to think about value that way. But remember this is partly an efficiency play for institutions and asset managers because they're all under examination on those fees for in the active space. But it's as much a functionality and what are the benefits and do I get the functionality that I need. And so, our view as we've got a premier property here that can help do both. And that's what makes an attractive for the range of constituents you have. And at least as an example, we think this is in the range of what someone could expect but it would depend on what they have, they build it internally, how fragmented, how many little providers do they have. And so there is probably a range around that.
Jay Hooley
And Vivek, I would just add, this is Jay, that, I do think that the cost and the efficiency is important, but if you think about our own synergy model, it's only a third of what the value is. And I think of this as giving states to access to the front office platform world. And the network effect that can be created by having a Charles River through 300 client connected to State Street's liquidity and trading engines. I think it's a pretty powerful concept. And that's just the start, that doesn't include the other relationships and partnerships that will wire into this as Ron referenced earlier.
Vivek Juneja
And as a lead time for getting these kinds of follow ups, getting CRD contracts similar to what you have to go through on the rest of your business which can be multi-year process?
Jay Hooley
Yes, let me take that. I think it depends is the answer Vivek, this is Jay. CRD is the system that has multiple components. And so when you changing out a software platform that's a careful exercise that has some lead time to it. And I would say that the short to long lead time will be defined by the complexity of the environment. SSGA is a reasonably complex environment both globally across asset classes. And I'd say once that gets lined up that's probably 1 year, 1.5 year kind of implementation cycle with deliveries along the way. It doesn't all the way and it happened in the final day.
Vivek Juneja
I guess I was trying to think off, Jay, the whole idea of pitching and winning business, which I know for traditional middle and back office as a multi-year. So that's what I was trying to get a sense of CRD so much similar.
Ron O'Hanley
Yes. This is Ron, Vivek. I think that, again, it will be quite client-specific, but if there’s a situation where we're already doing a lot of transformation work with a client and working with them, for example, in moving their middle office, you could see this is being a pretty rapid add-on to that because a lot of the things that you do or if we already have the middle office, a lot of the things that would be required to plug that in, we’d have already done. So I think, if you’re asking one, will the pipeline build fairly quickly? Yes, probably will although to be clear what we're focused on how in the first few months after the close. We want to make sure that they’re continuing to serve their existing clients very well. And then we’ll add to the pipeline has it makes sense.

Vivek Juneja
Yes, because I noticed, your compound annual growth is almost 7% to 14%. So I’m trying to get a sense of over what period should we expect that to happen?
Eric Aboaf
Yes, I think certainly over the 3-year time period for that, we have to, we gave you a CAGR on that, right. So the first year it'll be closer to the seven and the year, a little higher. But we think of this as mid-teens growing stream. At least as we are broaden them into our clients whether it’s our U.S. clients, and I showed you the overlap data, which I think is quite striking. We can bring them into half of our top-tier clients where they’ve not been able to get in the door where we know the CEOs and CIOs and then internationally. So it’ll build overtime and our view is it provides a nice stream. But as Ron said, we got to be careful, right. We got a first really invest in current clients, serving them as well and building this business.
Operator
Your next question comes from the line Brian Kleinhanzl with KBW.
Brian Kleinhanzl
Just one quick question first maybe, I'll take you back to what Vivek just asked. How long one from integration, we will actually go out to clients and say this is our end-to-end solution that we have for you. May I know how you want have deal closed in the fourth quarter, but when can you actually bring that solution to clients? Like what quarter, what year?
Jay Hooley
Brian, I would say, this is Jay. I would say we’re working on this already. I think we said it a few times but the fact that SSGA is two years into -- SSGA, obviously, a middle and back office client of State Street and has been working on this for a year, has given us a chance to really understand the connect points and understand the things that can be delivered in a relatively short period of time and those things that will happen overtime. So I think it will evolve. But probably pretty quickly, we’ll be able to show some linkages to the existing Charles River client base and to the State Street client base, which will show some value and it will grow over time. And I think, if you think about not only wiring this together from a State Street's standpoint, but wiring additional capabilities from other firms into this, it’ll just continue to grow.
Unidentified Company Representative 
Yes, and what I would add to that is, I think the important thing to know about this client base and this segment is that, even those firms that have are starting to outsource the middle office, they haven’t, most actually haven’t put in an integrated solution into their front-office. So this isn't about necessarily displacing somebody else. It's often times what we're displacing is proprietary systems or spread sheets that have been built up overtime. And as we're, given again that we're working with them in the middle office, it's a pretty easy conversation to say here what's contributing to the complexity of your middle office. It has to do with your front-office and what's help you figure this out.
Brian Kleinhanzl
Okay. Great. And then maybe just one quick on the financials from the deal, Eric, you mentioned that the CET1 dilution was 50 basis points. But can you help us break that down. I don't know if I recall what the total intangibles were from a deal. I don't know if there would be any RWA impacts from the deal? Thanks.
Eric Aboaf
Yeah, it's Eric. I think the easiest way to think about this is $2.6 billion of goodwill and intangibles, right, and obviously all those are deducted from capital and a regulatory reporting. And so we've developed a fully kind of ratio neutral financing of equity on the other side. So that those -- that could go on intangibles. So if -- Brian, if everything was contemporaneously -- it'd be neutral in Tier 1 capital and leverage capital basis and that would be that deterioration on the set 1 ratio. I think the next part of that is overtime, there is a mix of goodwill and intangibles. The intangibles come through expense base unless the deduction is lower. And then if you can just model it out based on, I think, we've given the intangible split is roughly 800 to 900 over the 10 years. And I think you can just work through on a model how that plays out. And so that will come through our expense base, but the deduction from capital will come out. And that will play through kind of a classic multi-year model, but we can surely help you with offline.

Operator
The next question comes from the line of Gerard Cassidy with RBC Capital Markets.
Gerard Cassidy 
I apologize if you've asked this question I jumped on late. I understand that you're going to keep Charles River separate, as a separate entity and I'm assuming they're not a bank holding company or any do not have a banking license. Are there any regulatory issues that you have to address with them as you integrate them as part of your bank holding company? Any added costs or anything like that because they're not regulated by the bank regulators today?
Eric Aboaf
Gerard, it's Eric. Within the financial guidance that we've given you here on revenues or cost to deliver the revenue and the expenses, we've actually factored in what you've usually have to do to take a private company and put it into a public setting. So I think there is a usual work we have to do on the accounting and auditing and financial reporting side for the various implementations that we have. And then we got the same thing on the more bank regulatory side, clearly, it has grown from safety and soundness standpoint and data security and so forth at the level that you'd expect a bank of our size and scope to have until we get back to that.
Gerard Cassidy
Okay. And then the second, I know you've given us some good data about the revenue synergies on Slide 8. And the internal rate of return that you guys calculated and the expectation that this was accretive. With a run rate today of your total revenues of about $12 billion, it seems like, and this happens in other acquisitions for your company and others that these benefits are hard for investors to kind of extract down 2, 3 years down the road to see if it’s really working. Are there any objective measures that you can share with us that we should look at that we can really see that? Yes, this deal was a great deal or no it’s not coming as expected. Aside from what you’ve given us in this slide, since again, they can blended into your regular numbers?
Eric Aboaf
Yes, I think, Gerard, we’ll be doing exactly you’d like to see, right. Because we need to make sure that we extract the value from this acquisition and it’s not just combined with other activities. Now, like you say, it’s not a perfect science to do that. But our perspective as each one of these, because there are 5 buckets we’ve given you, they’re actually dozen buckets behind that, I think that we'd like to track. But take them by example, the liquidity services that we put against the platform. That comes through and defined revenue streams against defined clients and through specific systems that we need to track, actually just book it on the GL in the right way and that should be something that we can trace back, we need to trace it back just for our own data lineage standpoint. And so that’s the kind of thing we can share. I think wealth management is compartment. I think if you go back to the top of the list, we talked about converting additional clients from the on-premises to cloud application that we will be able to find clients, client counts, what were they, what are they now, what’s under implementation, so with some view of the trajectory. So we’ll do everything we can. We’ll be doing it, anyway, internally, right. And we’ll certainly find ways to share that with you on some kind of regular basis to bring it together. I think if you step back though, at the end of the day, I think we've given guidance as to what we think our underlying growth rate is before the acquisition. We did that in January. And that gave you some sense for how we think of the toxicity and accounting and management businesses, end markets businesses to grow. And our perspective is this can add percentage point on top of that. But we’ll do everything we can to show you with the transparency that’s possible whether we’re achieving it or how we end up at what pace.

Operator
Your final question comes from the line of Jeff Harte with Sandler O'Neill.
Jeffery Harte
Good morning, guys. Most things have been covered, but just a couple. Can you talk a little bit about the revenue terms in the front office space now? I mean, is this potentially big offering, but I’m kind of wondering how that compares to your more traditional businesses were from the outside. We kind of still calculate the fees as a percent of assets under custody continuing to decline?
Eric Aboaf
I’ll start Jeff and maybe ask Ron to weight in. I think that, if I compare the back, middle and front, I would say the back office pretty mature as far as the set of services and the set of competitors. The middle office, maybe, 40% of that outsourced today. There’s more to go. I’d say the front office is even more immature. And that, and Ron referenced this earlier the front offices are up and running, but the pressure that people have feeling to consolidate systems get that data replaced, all tier proprietary systems caused us need to say the front office is probably has the most explosive growth opportunity in it. We size the market at a billion but I would say from a standpoint of change, churn and growth, the front office has the most attractive growth of those three segments. Bur Ron, what would you think?
Ron O'Hanley
I'd agree with that Jay. And Jeff, what I would add is that, if you think about it, many of the kinds of tools and capabilities that we're now able to offer in the data space. They just weren't able to be offered 5, 10 years ago in terms of particularly some of the Big Data analytics and the unstructured data analytics kinds of tools. So you're creating basically -- it's a relatively new market with new offerings. And as Jay noted, in many cases you're taking things that either weren't being done or were being done in a fairly primitive way in the front office and now putting it together in a much more industrial strength kind of data analytics and platform package.
Jeffery Harte
Okay. And in client retentions, can you talk bit about, a) how important it is and b) the financial impacts? I mean our retention packages and things like that included in $200 million of acquisition and restructuring costs?
Eric Aboaf
Yes, it's Eric. Yes, absolutely. There is about $50 million that we put aside for that kind of that the talent that we're bringing on. And we're we'd like to expand on that talent actually overtime because that's what's going to drive additional growth in the business. So that's the important part of the $200 million that we summarized there.
Operator
And there are no further questions at this time.
Eric Aboaf
Thanks, Lisa, and thanks everybody for joining us this morning. We look forward to providing you an update in October after the third quarter. Thank you.
Operator
This concludes today's conference. You may now disconnect.
